1SPEECH OF SHRI R.K. SHANMUKHAM CHETTY, MINISTER OF
FINANCE INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1947-1948
I rise to present the first Budget of a free and independent India. This occasion
may well be considered an historic one and I count it a rare privilege that it has fallento me to be the Finance Minister to present this Budget. While I am conscious of thehonour that is implied in this position, I am even more conscious of the responsibilitiesthat face the custodian of the finances of India at this critical juncture. I have no doubtthat in the discharge of my responsibilities I may count on the sympathetic andwholehearted co-operation of every Hon’ble Member in this House.
2. It is not necessary to dwell at any length on the political developments
which have led to the momentous changes that have taken place since the Budget forthe current year was presented to the Legislative Assembly last February. The partitionof the country has cut across its economic and cultural unity and the growth of centuriesof common life to which all the communities have contributed. The long-term effectsof the division of the country still remain to be assessed and we are too near the eventsto take a dispassionate view. When the ashes of controversy have died down, it will befor the future historian to judge the wisdom of the step and its consequences on thedestiny of one fifth of the human race. Whatever might be the immediate politicaljustification of partition, its economic consequences must be fully appreciated if thetwo Dominions are to safeguard the interests of the ordinary man in both the newStates. Regions which have functioned for centuries on a complementary basis havebeen suddenly cut asunder. To have had as a single economic unit a subcontinentpeopled by a fifth of the human race meant by itself a great advantage for the teemingmillions of its population an advantage not fully realised, and perhaps not properlyutilized while the unity was a fact. While it may be a comparatively easy matter tomake the necessary political adjustments resulting from partition, it would requiretime, patience, goodwill and mutual understanding to effect the adjustments necessitatedby the economic consequences of partition. Economically India and Pakistan haveeach points of advantages and disadvantages. In general, it may be said that, whileIndia is much the stronger at present in industrial production and mineral resources,Pakistan has some advantage in agricultural resources, especially foodstuffs. But thecomplementary character of their economies is even deeper than is indicated by thisgeneralisation. The compelling forces of economic necessity must create a friendlyand cooperative spirit between the two Dominions and I trust that, when the presentpassions subside and normal conditions of life return, our people will work together tosecure that, notwithstanding the political division, the economic life of the commonman is not injured. So far as we are concerned, the Indian Union with its populationof nearly 300 millions will be the second largest country in the world next to China.2Our economy is more balanced than that of most countries and, in spite of the setbacks
resulting from partition, our large natural resources and sound financial position willenable us to launch a vigorous economic plan for substantially raising the living standardof our people.
3. The Budget Statement that I am presenting today will cover a period of
7
1/2 months from the 15th August, 1947 to the 31st March, 1948. I may briefly explain
the circumstances in which it has been necessary to present a fresh Budget for this
period. With the division of the country and the emergence of two independentGovernments in place of the old Central Government, the Budget for the current year1947-48 passed by the Legislature last March ceased to be operative. Although under
the transitional provisions of the constitution, Government could authorize the
expenditure necessary for the rest of the financial year, it was felt that it will be inaccordance with the public wish that a Budget should be placed before therepresentatives of the people at the earliest possible moment. There is nothing
spectacular about my statement and there will be no surprises associated with a Budget.
I shall place before the House our estimate of revenue and expenditure for this periodand I shall try to indicate in broad outlines the pattern of the economic life of thecountry and the problems that we will have to face in the immediate future.
PARTITION ARRANGEMENTS
4. Before I proceed to deal with the estimates for the year, the House would
doubtless wish to have a brief account of the broad details of the partition and itsimmediate financial and economic results. As soon as the decision to divide the countrywas taken, a Partition Council, consisting of the representatives of both the futureGovernments, was set up to implement the decision. A number of Expert Committees,on which both the future Governments were equally represented, were appointed underthe aegis of the Partition Council to work out the administrative and other consequencesof the partition. These Committees, some of which are assisted by a number ofdepartmental subcommittees, dealt with all aspects of the problems arising out of thepartition such as the transfer of staff and organisations, the division of assets andliabilities, the arrangements for the coinage and currency In the two Dominions, thetrade and economic relations between them, the continuance of economic controls andso on. These Committees had to complete their work in a matter of four to six weeksand the House will appreciate that in the short time available to deal with these issues,some of which were of the utmost complexity and importance, it was not possible toreach an agreement on all matters before the 15
th August 1947 when the two Dominions
came into existence and took over the Government of their respective territories. Anumber of important points were accordingly left over for further consideration by thetwo Dominions and, in the absence of an agreement between them, for reference to anArbitral Tribunal which has been set up. Among the important issues on which it hasnot been possible to reach an agreement, I may mention the allocation of debt betweenthe two Dominions, the method of discharging the pensionary liability, the valuation3of the Railways, the division of the assets of the Reserve Bank and the division of the
movable stores held by the Army. Some of these issues are likely to go before theArbitral Tribunal and the House will not expect me to say anything further about themat this stage. It was also found impossible to reconstitute the Armed Forces betweenthe two Dominions and allocate the military stores, equipment and installations betweenthem before the 15
th August 1947. For the completion of this work, and for clothing,
feeding and paying the Armed Forces till their reconstitution had been completed, aJoint Defence Council representing the two Dominions with an independent Chairmanand with a Supreme Commander responsible to the Council, has been set up. ThisCouncil was originally expected to complete its work by the 1
st of April 1948 but it is
now hoped that this may be mostly achieved by the end of this month.
5. The long range fiscal, financial and economic relations between the two
Dominions still remain to be considered, but for the rest of the current year theintention is to maintain, within the framework of the agreements arrived at, thestatus quo before the partition. For the present both the Dominions will continue the
existing taxes and duties, there will be a free movement of trade between them
without any internal barriers and the import and exchange controls of the twoDominions will be co-ordinated. It has also been agreed that till the end of September1948 the two Dominions will remain under a common currency system managed bythe Reserve Bank, although from the 1
st April next Pakistan will have its own
overprinted notes and coin. So far as revenue is concerned, each Dominion will
ordinarily retain what it collects but in respect of income tax on assessments for.1946-47 and earlier years and uncollected demands ion the date of the partition anarrangement for sharing the receipts arising in both the Dominions has been arrivedat. In the matter of the division of assets and liabilities, it has not been possible, asI have explained earlier, to reach an agreement on a number of important points
including the allocation of debt and the discharge of the liability for pensions. But
the responsibility for the outstanding liabilities of the old Government could not,obvious reasons, be left vague and undetermined and the only practicable coursewas for one of the Dominions to accept the initial liability to the creditors and settlewith the other the contribution to be made by it. The initial liability for the outstandingloans, guarantees and financial obligations of the late Central Government at the
time of the partition and for the pensions chargeable to it has been placed by law on
the Indian Dominion subject to an equitable contribution from Pakistan. I am surethe House will welcome this decision because in the interests of the credit of boththe successor Governments it is obviously undesirable to leave those who had lentmoney to the previous Government or had earned pensions under it in any doubt asto the Government they should approach for their dues.
REVIEW OF ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
6. There has been a marked deterioration in the economic situation in the
country since March last. The situation has been aggravated by the large scale4disturbances which burst out suddenly, more especially in the Punjab and the North-
West Frontier Province. Apart from the serious economic consequences arising out ofthese disturbances, the human misery that it has caused cannot be measured in termsof money. Thousands of innocent lives have been lost in the two Dominions andmigration on a scale unprecedented in history has taken place. The total number ofpeople involved in this mass migration of population has reached colossal figures oneither side giving rise to problems of great magnitude affecting the economy of thecountry. The Immediate effect of these tragic developments has been to divert theattention of the Government almost completely from normal activities. There has beenan almost total breakdown of the economy of the East and West Punjabs. WhileGovernment have done and are doing everything possible to relieve the immediatedistress and suffering of the refugees, the formulation of long-range plans for theirrehabilitation raises formidable issues both in the financial and administrative fields.These problems have imposed a heavy burden on the Central exchequer, the magnitudeof which it is not possible to assess at present. The budget of the Central Governmentfor the next few years will be materially affected by this unexpected development inthe country, Our whole programme of post-war development will have to be reviewedin the light of this context.
7. The food position has continued to cause grave anxiety both to the
Provincial Governments and the Central Government. The country has just weathereda serious threat of a breakdown of its rationing system. The results of the “Grow MoreFood Campaign” have been on the whole disappointing. During the three years 1944-45, 1945-46 and 1946-47 we had to import from abroad 43.80 lakhs of tons offoodgrains at a cost of over 127 crores of rupees. Daring the current year from Aprilto September we have already imported 10.62 lakhs of tons of foodgrains at a cost ofover 42 crores of rupees. Apart from its being a constant source of anxiety, the relianceon the import of foodgrains from abroad of such magnitude imposes a heavy strain on
the finances of the Government. In recent years our exchange difficulty is almost
entirely due to the import of foodgrains on such a large scale. The meagre exchangeresources available to us are consumed by the purchase of foodstuffs abroad with theresult that we have to impose the most stringent restrictions on the import of manyother essential articles. The various steps necessary for making the country self-sufficient in foodgrains must now claim the highest priority. The implementation ofthis policy must largely depend on the Provincial Governments though the Governmentof India has been and will always be prepared to afford all possible help In thisdirection. We have sent a mission to Australia for the purchase of the surplus wheat ofthat country and we are hoping that we might be in a position to get from Australia asubstantial quantity of wheat during the next year. An expert committee under theChairmanship of Sir Purushottamdas Thakurdas has been examining the food position
in the country and the Committee has submitted an interim report which is receiving
the attention of the Government.58. The deterioration in the economic situation has been particularly noticed
in respect of prices which have shown an unchecked upward tendency. Between the
5th April and the 9th August this year the Economic Adviser’s index number of wholesale
prices rose by 7 points while the Bombay cost of living index advanced by 14 points.Taking the Bombay cost of living index number, while it was 243 in August 1945 it
rose to 267 in August 1946 and reached 284 in August 1947. The chief factor which
has contributed to this development is the general decline in agricultural and industrial
production In the country due partly to the wide prevalence of communal disorders
and generally to the increasing Industrial unrest. While the supply position has been
deteriorating, increases in wages and salaries given by private employers and the
Government had the effect of augmenting the purchasing power of the people andwidening the gap between current money income and production of goods. The situation
would not have been so bad if the unbalance between money and goods was confined
to these factors only. The most disturbing factor which affects the situation today is
the unspent balances of Individuals and institutions accumulated during the peak years
of Inflation which are being spent on the deferred wants of individuals, repairs toindustry and on the building of trade inventory. In other words, the money demand for
goods Is colossal compared to their local production. While the inflation in war time
was due to the large increases in currency circulation (which rose from Rs. 172 crores
in 1939 to over Rs. 1200 crores at the end of 1945) without any tangible increase in
the supply of goods the present Inflation Is not due to further increase of currency but
to a steady fall in the supply of goods. Although the total available money, whether
currency or bank deposits, has slightly fallen It has spread out more among a widercircle of people in the form of wages and salaries and thus the actual purchasing
power in the hands of those who spend it on ordinary goods has greatly increased. But
the supply of goods has meanwhile fallen and has resulted in an upward trend of
prices. To take only a few examples of the marked fall in internal production, it may
be mentioned that as against a production of 4, 600 million yards of mill made cloth
and 1, 500 million yards of handloom cloth in 1945 the production this year is estimated
at 3,900 million yards and 1,200 million yards respectively. The production of steel inthe current year is also expected to show a drop of nearly 400,000 tons compared with
the peak production of 1,200,000 tons during the war. The production of cement has
also grown steadily worse, the estimated production this year showing a drop of 700,
000 tons over the capacity of over 2
1/2 million tons. In recent months the production
of coal has shown some improvement. but so far as the consuming public is concerned,this has been more than neutralised by difficulties in transport resulting in large
accumulation of coal at the pit heads. Transport and other difficulties explain the drop
in production to some extent, but this is also partly due to labour unrest and strikes.
9. If the economy of this country is to be placed on a sound footing and
maintained in a healthy condition, it is of the utmost importance to increase internalproduction. The chances of increasing the supplies of commodities by imports are not
very bright. Until recently we had a fair chance of sizable imports of consumer goods6from the British Commonwealth countries from accumulated balances, but with the
blocking of the major part of these and the growing adverse balance resulting from thelarge scale importation of foodgrains, the hope of procuring supplies from abroad isgrowing weak. We have therefore to fall back on our own resources. Governmenthave recently announced their scheme for increasing the production of cotton textileswhich, if worked in a spirit of co-operation between industry and labour, will result inthe production of an additional 1,000 million yards over the estimated production ofthe current year. It is intended to explore the possibilities of restoring the level ofproduction in other fields in a similar manner. I am fully conscious of the fact that anypolicy of stabilisation must aim not merely at the increase of production of bothconsumer and producer goods but also at the pegging of money incomes at an agreedand accepted level so that the increased volume of trading resulting from the increaseof production may neutralise the inflationary effects of the large volume of uncoveredmoney income. If this policy is to be carried out successfully, it would require anappreciation of the situation by labour and its wholehearted co-operation.
REVENUE
10. I shall now proceed to a brief review of the financial position for the rest
of the current year. But I must warn the House that the estimates now presented mustbe treated as very tentative as it has not been possible to assess with any measure ofaccuracy the effects of the partition on our revenue and expenditure. I hope it will bepossible to present a more accurate picture when the revised estimates are placedbefore the House along with the budget for the next year.
11. I have budgeted for a revenue of Rs. 171.15 crores and a revenue
expenditure of Rs. 197.39 crores. The net deficit on revenue account in the periodcovered by these estimates will be Rs. 26.24 crores. But the final figure may be higherbecause the actual amount likely to be required for meeting the expenditure inconnection with the relief and rehabilitation of refugees is still very uncertain andsome help may also have to be given to the new Provinces of West Bengal and EastPunjab for which, in the absence of any reliable data, no provision has been included.
12. The revenue receipts, as I have said, are estimated at Rs. 171.15 crores.
Customs receipts have been placed at Rs. 50.5 crores and take into account the effect
of the recent restrictions on imports for conserving our foreign exchange resources.
Income tax is expected to yield Rs. 29.5 crores on account of E.P.T. and Rs. 88.5crores on account of ordinary collections. Although the Niemeyer Award has nowceased to have effect it is proposed to maintain the share of the Provinces in theincome tax revenue at approximately the same level as now after making an adjustmentin respect of the Provinces and parts of Provinces now included in Pakistan. TheCentre will retain Rs. 3 crores out of the Provincial moiety as provided in the originalbudget. On this basis, the divisible pool of income tax is estimated at Rs. 66 croresand the Provincial share at Rs. 30 crores.713. Revenue from the Posts and Telegraphs Department is expected to amount
to Rs. 15.9 crores and the working expenses and interest to 13.9 crores leaving a netsurplus of Rs. 2 crores. The outright contribution of the department to general revenueswill be three-fourths of the realised surplus, the department retaining the balance. Thedepartment will get a rebate of interest on its share of the accumulated profits in thepast which, after allowing for the portion of the department transferred to Pakistan, isexpected to amount to Rs. 71 crores. As regards the contribution from Railways we donot expect anything in the current year. The House is already aware of the reasons forthis from the Railway Budget.
EXPENDITURE
14. The total expenditure for the year is estimated at Rs. 197.39 crores, of
which Rs. 92.74 crores is on account of the Defence Services, the balance representingCivil expenditure. Following the customary procedure, I shall first deal with the DefenceEstimates which remain, as in the past, the largest single item of expenditure.
DEFENCE SERVICES
15. The reconstitution of the Armed Forces in India into two Dominion forces
was an inevitable consequence of the partition of the country. This decision came ata time when the Armed Forces were in the process of rapid demobilisation. While asubstantial measure of demobilisation had already been achieved, the process wasarrested as a consequence of the decision to divide the remaining forces between thetwo Dominions on a communal cum optional basis. The strength of the Army at thetime stood roughly at 410,000 troops. After the completion of the reconstitution of theArmy, India will have roughly 260,000 troops. An organisation under a SupremeCommander, acting under the direction of the Joint Defence Council, was set up and
made responsible for carrying out the reconstitution, and for general administrative
control of the entire Armed Forces until the completion of reconstitution. From the15
th August 1947, however, the operational control of the troops in each Dominion
was transferred to the Dominion Government. It was originally expected that thereconstitution would be completed by the 31
st March 1948. But the Armed Forces
Headquarters of each of the Dominion have been able to take over administrativeresponsibilities in a greater measure and earlier than was originally anticipated andthe reconstitution of the Forces has in consequence been accelerated. It is now expectedthat this will be completed in the more important fields by the end of this month whenthe Supreme Commander’s organisation will be disbanded.
16. The future size and composition of the Armed Forces have been engaging
the attention of Government, as it is obvious that they must be related to the alteredstrategic needs of the country as well as to its reduced financial resources. Under thepre-partition demobilisation plan the Army was to be reduced to about 230,000 menfor undivided India by the 1
st April, 1949 against which we shall have about 260,000
men for our share alone after the reconstitution of the Armed Forces. Due to the8widespread communal disturbances in the Punjab and the sporadic outbursts of disorder
in other parts of the country, there has been an unprecedented call on the ArmedForces in aid of the civil power. Government have accordingly come to the conclusionthat the existing Forces should be retained until the 31st March 1948 but the positionwill be reviewed next month. The financial effect of this is that in spite of a reductionof revenue resources the expenditure on Defence Services will be running higher thanit normally should during this year. In the present fluid conditions it is impossible toforecast the position in 1948-49.
17. India had never an adequate Navy or Air Force and the effect of the
partition has been to reduce them still further, so far as the Dominion of India isconcerned. It is obvious that even without the disturbances there could be no questionof an overall demobilisation in these services. The future development plans of theseservices are under consideration.
18. The complete nationalisation of India’s Armed Forces in the shortest time
possible is the accepted policy of Government. Due, however, to various reasonswhich are now a matter of history, we have had a shortage of Indian officers for fillingsome of the posts in the technical services and the senior appointments, This holdsgood to a varying degree for all the three services. It was therefore decided to employ
a number of British officers who volunteered to stay, for one year in the first instance,
from the 15
th August 1947. As these officers hold the King’s Commission they were
transferred to a special list of the British Army and the Supreme Commander assumedcontrol over them. When subsequent developments indicated that the SupremeCommander’s office may not continue beyond the 31
st December 1947 it was decided
to terminate the services of these British officers by the same date, leaving it to the
two Dominions to offer fresh terms to any British officers they may wish to employ.
The British officers have, therefore, been served with three months’ notice, as laiddown in their present terms of service, with effect from the 1
st October 1947. The
number of British officers whom it is essential for India to retain and the terms ofservice to be offered are now under the active consideration of Government. It may,however, be stated that the number of British officers to be retained will be relatively
small and it is hoped that all operational Commands, at least in the Army and the Air
Force, will be filled by Indian officers.
19. As has already been announced, an agreement was reached with the United
Kingdom Government that the withdrawal of the British Forces from India shouldcommence immediately after the transfer of power and completed as early as possible.The first detachment of British troops actually left India on the 17
th August 1947. It
was hoped at one time that the withdrawals would be completed before the end of1947 but due to shipping difficulties it now appears that this may take up to April1948. The British troops remaining in the country have, however, no operationalfunctions. Except two R.A.F. Transport Squadrons the rest are merely awaitingrepatriation.1SPEECH OF SHRI JOHN MATHAI, MINISTER OF FINANCE
INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1949-50
1 rise to present the Budget for 1949-50.
REVIEW OF ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
2. Although this is the fourth year since the cessation of hostilities, the return
of normal conditions, without which it is impossible to expand production and develop
trade, seems still as far off as ever. Over large parts of the world, conditions remaindisturbed and the progress of recovery from the ravages of the war is painfully slow. In
Europe the impasse in Berlin, the civil war in Greece and the emergence of two rival
camps among the countries that fought the war as allies are symptomatic of the abnormalconditions which still prevail. The Palestine question, which is a serious threat to peaceand stability in the Middle East, is still unsolved. Nearer home, the continuance of civilstrife in China, the disturbances in Burma, which concern us deeply in view of ourclose economic ties with that country and the large interests our nationals have in it,and the unprovoked assault of the Dutch on the Indonesian Republic, all these retardthe economic recovery not merely of this largely underdeveloped area of the globe butof the whole world. Prosperity, like peace, is indivisible and while these conflicts aregoing on in various parts of the world involving a tragic waste of men and material, thecommon man in all countries, particularly the less developed countries continues to paya heavy price In want and suffering.
3. In our own country, as in most other countries in the post-war period, the
major problem has been that of keeping the inflationary trends under control. It is notnecessary for me to dilate on the causes of the emergence of these trends, since the endof the war. While as a result of the war the purchasing power in the hands of thecommunity increased considerably, the available supply of commodities in the post-war period was not sufficient to meet the increasing demand for them. The shortage ofessential commodities, particularly food and clothing, aggravated the situation owingto the rise in the money income of some sections of the community who in the pastnever competed for food and consumer goods on the same scale. Difficulties in transportand distribution accentuated the shortages while the partition last year and the economicdislocation caused over considerable parts of the country by the movement of populationbetween the two Dominions made the position worse. A steady rise in prices occurred
throughout 1947 the general index number of wholesale prices rising from 290.5 at the
beginning of the year to 314.2 at the end of December. In the first seven months of 1948there was a further steep rise in prices, the index number of wholesale prices rising byas much as 76 points to 390.1. Since then the prices have slightly dropped and as a
result of the various measures taken by Government prices have remained more or lesssteady.24. The answer to the problem of inflation and high prices is to increase the
supply of commodities to meet the existing demand and until this position is reached tocontrol the distribution of the available supply of the essential commodities. In thematter of food the supply position still continues to be difficult and last year owing tothe poor crops in certain parts of the country we have had to import 2.8 million tonsfrom overseas at a cost of Rs. 130 crores against an estimated import of 2 million tonsat a cost of Rs. 110 crores. The position is expected to be still more difficult this yearowing to the floods in Bihar and the United Provinces, the damage caused by the recentcyclone in Bombay and the outbreak of famine in parts of Gujarat, Saurashtra, Rajasthanand Cutch and imports may amount to 4 million tons. As the House is aware, it hasalready been decided to reintroduce food control and it is hoped that this will secure anequitable supply of food grains throughout the country at fair prices. In respect of othercommodities the position in regard to internal production has, I am glad to say, beenencouraging in recent months although it has not been possible in many cases to reachthe peak production of the war years or the target that has been set. Last year theproduction of coal at 29.73 million tons and of steel at 854,000 tons just fell short of theproduction in the previous year while the production of salt rose from 49.6 millionmaunds to 59.3 million maunds, of cotton yarn from 1,315 million lbs. to 1,442 millionlbs., of cloth from 3,816 million yards to 4,338 million yards, of art silk fabrics from 85million yards to 114 million yards, of plywood from 28.6 million sq. feet to 38.63million sq. feet and of soap from 80,000 tons to 190,000 tons. The flow of raw materialsto industry has also improved with the improvement in the transport position whilewith the relaxation of import controls there has been a larger flow of imported goods.Production has been greatly assisted by the occurrence of fewer strikes and labourdisputes. If the present favourable trends in production continue, I have no doubt that itwill  be  possible  not  merely  to arrest the rise of prices but to bring them downgradually.
5. The state of the capital market in the year under review has been a matter
of concern to Government. While there is obviously a large amount of money in thecountry competing for the limited supply of goods, the Investment market has beenstagnant and there has been little flow of money into Government loans or into industrialconcerns. This stagnation is due In large measure to the prevailing uncertainty in regardto matters affecting industrial development and prospects. My own view is that withthe huge potential demand in this country for both consumer and capital goods, there isbound to be for many years a wide field for private enterprise and that in this matter noone who invests money is taking a greater risk than in any other country in the world.
6. As I mentioned a while ago, the fight against inflation has been one of
Government’s main pre-occupations this year. As Honourable Members are aware,Government consulted various interests and sections of public opinion regarding themeasures necessary to deal with this situation. In a matter of this kind, It is obviouslynot possible to expect complete unanimity of opinion as to either the causes of Inflation3or the remedies to be adopted. But it was clear that immediate action should be taken to
prevent, as far as possible, the further creation of purchasing power in the hands of thecommunity and to take all steps possible to stimulate production and Instil a spirit ofconfidence in industry. With this end In view, in the field of taxation additional dutieson certain articles of luxury such as liquor, tobacco, motor cars, silk and art silk fabricswere imposed and an excise duty on superfine cloth was levied. Power was taken tomake provisional assessments of income tax on the basis of returns submitted by theassessees. A system of interest bearing deposits for income tax introduced in 1943 wasalso revived and It was decided to postpone for a further period of three years therefund of deposits of Excess Profits Tax except for approved purposes. A temporarylimit was also placed on the amount that may be distributed as dividend by publiccompanies, by an Ordinance, the enactment of which into law is now under considerationby the House. Among measures taken to stimulate industrial production, I would mentionthe reduction in the import duty on machinery and certain industrial raw materials andthe abolition of the import duty on cotton yarn. New industrial undertakings commencingproduction in the next three years have been given exemption from income tax for thefirst five years up to a limit of six per cent per annum on their capital. The rules regulatingdepreciation allowances have also been liberalised. In the field of Governmentalexpenditure a rapid review was conducted of all capital and development schemesincluding the Provincial schemes. As a result the total provision for capital anddevelopment schemes and loans has been substantially reduced. It was also made clearto the Provinces that in the present financial situation they should not count on Centralassistance for implementing their schemes of social or agrarian reform. The House willrealise that it was not without regret that we decided to hold up even temporarily thevarious schemes of development the execution of which is necessary for the well beingof the country. But the need for economy was imperative and we had to postpone allavoidable expenditure. But this has not led to the slowing down of any productivescheme or any scheme essential for the national Interest. I would like to take thisopportunity to express my sense of gratitude to the Provincial Governments for theirready co-operation in this matter.
BALANCE OF PAYMENTS
7. The main features in the external financial position of the country in the
year under review have been the sharp decline in the sterling balances held by theReserve Bank of India, the growing difficulty in the financing of imports from the hardcurrency areas and the emergence of Pakistan as a foreign country for currency purposeswith the separation of its currency from that of India. The sterling balances whichreached the peak figure of Rs. 1,733 crores at the end of 1945-46 declined by Rs. 121crores to Rs. 1,612 crores during 1946-47. This reduction was due mainly to the largeimports of food but there were also substantial imports of other goods in satisfaction ofthe pent-up demand of the war years and a certain amount of repatriation of Britishcapital. During 1947-48 the reduction was somewhat smaller due to the restrictive importpolicy which was introduced towards the close of 1947 and the balances fell by only4Rs. 67 crores to Rs. 1,545 crores. In the first ten months of the current year there has
been a further drop of Rs. 556 crores in these balances. This heavy outgo is due toseveral causes. The first is the payment to the United Kingdom Government in accordancewith the agreement reached with them last July, of Rs. 284 crores for the purchase ofannuities for financing the payment of sterling pensions and the acquisition of theDefence installations and stores left behind in India by the United Kingdom at the endof the war. The second is the payment to the State Bank of Pakistan of. Pakistan’s shareof these balances following the separation of its currency from that of India. This paymentis still continuing as the sterling and other assets of the Issue Department are handedover in instalments as Indian notes are withdrawn from circulation in Pakistan andhanded over to the Reserve Bank. Sterling to the extent of Rs. 177 crores has so far beentransferred to the Pakistan State Bank. The third factor responsible for the decline isIndia’s adverse balance of payments on current and capital account.
8. Government’s import policy is largely determined by the trend of the balance
of payments. The aim of this policy is so to regulate trade that while it is kept at thehighest possible level consistent with the needs and requirements of the country, Indiashould not have an overall deficit in her balance of payments on current account duringany particular period of time of more than the amount by which it has been agreed withthe United Kingdom Government India, s sterling balances should be drawn upon.Under the present agreement signed last July it has been agreed that India’s free sterlingaccount which had a balance at the end of June, 1948 of £ 80 million will be creditedwith an equivalent sum during the period July, 1949 to June, 1951. In pursuance of thispolicy and also with the immediate object of reducing the inflationary pressure in thecountry, import controls were relaxed during the course of the year, and I am glad to saythat they have resulted in substantially increasing the available supply of goods in country.
9. While our overall balance of payment position is on the whole satisfactory,
our balance of payments with the dollar and hard currency countries is causing us greatconcern. In the pre-war years India had usually a surplus with the United States ofAmerica and during the war years owing to the drastic curtailment of imports to conservedollars for the war effort, India continued to have increasing surpluses. After the war,the trend of trade rapidly reversed itself and, in common with the rest of the world, thiscountry started having substantial deficits on hard currency account. The reason forthis was that we had increasingly to turn to the hard currency countries for ourrequirements as the countries whose economies had been disrupted by the war couldnot meet them. This was particularly true of food which is today the largest singleconsumer of foreign exchange. Burma could not supply all the rice we needed becauseof the ravages of the war and its aftermath; Australia could not give us all the wheat wewanted because the United Kingdom had priority in supply.
10. India’s dollar deficit in the past used to be financed by the central reserves
of the sterling area. But beginning from January, 1948 the United Kingdom refused tocarry -this responsibility any further and insisted on limiting the convertibility of our5sterling very rigidly. The limits imposed - £ 10 million ($40 million) for the half year
January-June, 1948 and £ 15 million ($60 million) for the year July, 1948-June, 1949 -
bear no relation whatever to our needs. Concurrently with the imposition of these limits
on convertibility, there came the separation of the exchange resources of Pakistan fromIndia which also took place In January, 1948. This has also handicapped us severely asmany commodities which before partition earned hard currency, such as raw jute, raw
cotton and hides and skins, were largely exported from territories now in Pakistan. In
spite of the maximum possible limitation of imports from the hard currency areas andthe maximum possible encouragement of exports thereto, India had a deficit In herbalance of payments with the hard currency countries in the six months April to
September, 1948 of $45 million. The deficit for the next three months, for which
preliminary figures are available, is expected to be $48 million. Of these deficits, thepurchase of food grains was responsible for $35 million and $40 million respectively.These deficits which exceed by far the convertibility allowed to us by the United
Kingdom have been met by loans from the International Monetary Fund from which
since March, 1948 we have borrowed no less than $92 million.
11. I confess that this chronic dollar deficit is causing Government no little
anxiety. Honourable Members are aware that we intend to negotiate dollar loans from
the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. But these loans will be
available only for financing the purchase of equipment for our developmental projectsand not for current expenditure. We do not favour the idea of borrowing on the presentscale from the International Monetary Fund but if the central reserves of the sterling
area, to which we were at one time a source of strength insist on continuing to limit our
claims on them In the same way as at present, we shall have no alternative to continuingto borrow. One ray of hope in the situation lies, of course, in the fact that we hope, infuture years, to import less food and to divert our food purchases to the soft currency
areas. It is also possible that the international prices of food grains will not remain at
the present high levels.
12. While we have exchange control with all countries in the world, we have
none with Pakistan. This has been rendered possible by the fact that simultaneously
with the separation of their currencies on the 1
st July, 1948 India and Pakistan came to
a monetary and payments agreement. The main terms of this agreement, which is in thefirst instance valid for a period of one year, are that each party will hold the currency ofthe other up to a limit of Rs. 15 crores, that thereafter up to a further limit of Rs. 10
crores accounts will be settled in free sterling and the balance in sterling in Account No.
11. The reason for entering into an agreement of this kind was that the Governments ofboth Dominions were anxious to ensure that the obstacle to Inter-dominion trade, whichthe imposition of exchange control would necessarily entail, should, if possible, be
avoided. I am glad to say that this agreement has worked satisfactorily and that currency
considerations have not stood in the way of inter-dominion commerce.6FINANCIAL YEAR,  1948-49
13. I shall now proceed to give a brief review of the financial position in the
current and the ensuing years.
For the current year the deficit is now estimated at Rs. 1.55 crores against Rs.
2.14 crores provided In the budget.
REVENUE
14. The revenue receipts are now estimated at Rs. 338.32 crores against the
budget estimates of Rs. 255.24 crores, an increase of Rs. 83.08 crores. With the relaxationin the import controls during the course of the year there has been a considerableexpansion of imports and the revenue from Customs is expected to be Rs. 36.49 croresmore than the budget estimate. The yield from the excise duties on sugar, matches,tyres and tubes and vegetable products has also shown a substantial improvement andwith the excise duty on cotton cloth imposed last December and estimated to yieldRs. 7 crores in a full year the revenue from Central excise duties is likely to be Rs. 4.28crores more. Income tax receipts are now placed at Rs. 20.62 crores more than thebudget largely as a result of the intensive drive for the clearance of arrears and therecent ordinance authorising the provisional collection of tax on the basis of thestatements of income of the assessees, but of this increase of Rs. 5.38 crores will accrueto the provinces as their share of revenue. The Revenue from the two Governmentcommercial departments also shows increases. The contribution from Posts andTelegraphs Is likely to be Rs. 2.95 crores more while from the Railways, as the Houseis already aware, the contribution will amount to Rs. 7.34 crores against Rs. 4.5 crorestaken in the budget. The profits from currency also show an increase of Rs. 3.65 crores.There is also a carryover of Rs. 1.33 crores on account of Government’s share of theprofit on stocks of sugar frozen in December 1947 which was not realised during thatyear and certain pre-partition receipts amounting to Rs. 13.4 crores.
EXPENDITURE
15. The total expenditure this year is now estimated at Rs. 339.87 crores, an
increase of Rs. 82.49 crores over the budget estimate which nearly wipes out the increasein revenue. Of this Increase, Defence Services account for Rs. 34.35 crores and Civilestimates for the balance of Rs. 48.14 crores.
16. Defence Services. - The expenditure on Defence Services during the year
has been affected by the continuance of the operations in Kashmir, the extent and durationof which could not be foreseen at the time the budget was prepared and for which, inconsequence, no provision was included and also by the unforeseen deterioration in thesituation in Hyderabad which led to the police action last September. In view of thesedevelopments the armed forces had to be maintained at a higher strength than wascontemplated in the budget. New units had to be raised and some of the operationaldemands for stores, equipment and munitions had to be met by fresh procurement. Inaddition to our own forces we had to take in service larger forces from the Indian States7and the Government of Nepal also loaned us some of their troops for purposes of Internal
defence. All these measures entailed additional expenditure for which there was noprovision in the budget.
17. The increase of Rs. 48.14 crores in civil expenditure is mainly due to three
causes. Firstly, the revised estimates include a new provision of Rs. 20.75 crores formeeting pre-partition liabilities for which no provision was made in the budget. At thetime the budget was framed, sufficient data regarding the outstanding liabilities werenot available and the arrangements with Pakistan for meeting and adjusting these hadnot also been settled. It was hoped that these liabilities would be met and shared currentlyby the two Dominions but the Pakistan Government declined to meet these liabilitieson the ground that they were initially those of India and that Pakistan would take itsshare only through the debt settlement. The Government of India do not accept thisview as, in their opinion, after the division of the available cash balances of the undividedGovernment between the two Governments, the outstanding liabilities should be paidand currently shared by the two Governments. But in order to avoid hardship to thosewho had made supplies or rendered services to the undivided Government, theGovernment of India have agreed to meet the liabilities in the first instance. Certainoutstanding payments relating to the pre-partition period such as the Provincial share ofIncome-tax, are also due to the Provincial Governments now located In India which theGovernment of India propose to meet. Secondly, the expenditure on the relief andrehabilitation of refugees which has always been difficult to estimate and for which aprovision of Rs. 10.04 crores was made in the budget is now expected to amount to Rs.19.45 crores. This increase is partly due to the carryover of certain liabilities from theprevious year, mainly payments to Provincial Governments, which could not be madebefore the close of last year and partly to increased expenditure on relief which has tobe regulated with reference to the constantly changing requirements of the situation.Thirdly, the expenditure on the subsidising of imported food grains and the payment ofbonuses to Provincial Governments on internal procurement is now expected to exceedthe original budget by Rs. 12.05 crores. The House will remember that after a review ofthe food position last October it was decided that with effect from the 1
st October 1948
the Central share of the loss on the supply of imported food grains to deficit areasshould be raised from two thirds to three quarters and that a similar concession, limitedto the Centre meeting half the loss, should be extended to the Indian States. Part of theincrease is also due to the fact that while the budget provided for subsidies up to the endof the calendar year, provision has now been made for the full financial year.
I should also mention a further reason for the increase in civil expenditure. The
House will remember that in the budget for the current year my predecessor made alump cut of Rs. 2.5 crores for economies likely to result from the implementation of therecommendations of the Economy Committee. The work of this Committee has takensomewhat longer than was originally expected and its report on a number of Ministriesis still under examination. No savings are therefore likely to be realised this year. For8next year I am not making any provision at this stage as it is not possible, until firm
decisions have been taken on the recommendations, to estimate the savings likely to berealised. But I may assure the House that this does not mean that I do not expect anyeconomies to result from the Committee’s recommendations. On the contrary it is myintention to secure the utmost economy possible in public expenditure and the Housemay rest assured that the recommendations of the Committee will be most carefullyand earnestly considered by Government and the resulting economies enforced duringthe course of the year.
INCOME-TAX INVESTIGATION COMMISSION
18. Before I pass on to deal with the estimates for the coming year I should like
to mention the progress made in the work of the Income-tax Investigation Commission.Honourable Members will remember that the Act constituting the Commission assignedtwo duties to it, namely, to investigate and report on all matters relating to taxation onIncome, with particular reference to the extent to which the existing law relating to andprocedure for the assessment and collection of such taxation Is adequate to preventevasion and to investigate specific cases referred to the Commission by the CentralGovernment. On a study of the working of the income tax law and its administrationduring recent years, the Commission came to the conclusion that on a long term viewthe first task was no less important than the second, and as work on the second had forvarious reasons necessarily to be slow, the Commission devoted a great part of its timetill recently to the first task. This involved the examination of voluminous evidencetendered in reply to a comprehensive questionnaire which was issued and the Commissionhas recently submitted a long report in which it has made recommendations on manypoints of law and of administration. These recommendations are now being examinedwith a view to the necessary legislation being introduced, and it is hoped that it will bepossible to place a bill before the House at its next session.
19. As regards the Investigation of specific cases referred to it by Government,
the Commission has completed a few cases. Greater progress was not possible for avariety of reasons. Firstly, it was only In April 1948 that the necessary staff forinvestigation work could be placed at the disposal of the Commission. This was becauseit was not possible for the Income-tax Department to spare their more experiencedofficers for this work before April 1948, In view of the shortage of officers in theDepartment and the large amount of arrears that had to be cleared. However, this difficultyhas now been overcome to some extent, and the officers authorised by the Commissionare working in different cities carrying on investigation under instructions and directionsgiven by the Commission. It is the material gathered by them that will form the basis ofthe Commission’s work.
Another factor which has delayed the disposal of specific cases taken up for
enquiry is that It has been found that a good deal of general enquiry and collection offacts and figures Is a necessary preliminary to the Investigation of the specific cases.These general enquiries and the collation of the materials collected have taken a9considerable time, and the work is proceeding apace. Once this is completed, it may be
hoped that the disposal of specific cases will be expedited.
In this connection I may add that the possibility of disposing of the referred cases
by agreed settlement is being explored, and a bill will shortly be placed before theHouse for vesting the necessary powers for making such settlements in the hands of theCommission.
20. I now turn to the estimates for the next financial year. At the existing level
of taxation, I place the total revenue at Rs. 307.74 crores and the expenditure charged torevenue at Rs. 322.53 crores leaving a deficit of Rs. 14.79 crores.
REVENUE
21. The total receipt from customs is estimated at Rs. 107.25 crores. This
provides for a full year’s effect of the changes in the tariff in the course of this year aspart of the campaign against inflation. Central excises are expected to bring in Rs.57.75 crores, including Rs. 7 crores from the recently imposed excise duty on cottoncloth. Receipts from income tax, which include Rs. 11.22 crores on account of ExcessProfits Tax and Rs. 12.01 crores on account of Business Profits Tax have been placed atRs. 155 cwores. Honourable members will remember that it was decided last year thatadvance payments of tax should be taken direct to revenue instead of being treatedinitially as a deposit and, as a first step in the process of changing the accountingprocedure, advance payments of Corporation Tax were taken direct to revenue in thebudget for the current year. Next year, as a further step in the pr6cess, I have takencredit in the re-venue estimates for Rs. 12.5 crores for a part of these advance paymentsthat will be received during the year. I hope that the change will be completed over thenext three years. The divisible pool of income tax is estimated at Rs. 90.7 crores ofwhich the Centre will retain Rs. 46.85 crores leaving Rs. 43.85 crores as the Provincialshare. The profits from Currency and Mint after allowing for the share of Pakistan areestimated at Rs. 9.7 crores.
The revenue from the Posts and Telegraphs Department is expected to amount to
Rs. 30.26 crores and working expenses and interest to Rs. 28.63 crores, leaving a surplusof Rs. 1.68 crores. As in the current year this surplus will be shared equally by generalrevenues and the department which will get a rebate of interest on its share of theaccumulated profits, expected to amount to about Rs. 10 crores at the end of thebudget year.
The contribution from the Railways for next year has been taken at Rs. 4.72
crores, the amount provided in the Railway Budget.
EXPENDITURE
22. The total expenditure in the coming year to estimated at-Rs. 322.53 crores
of which Defence Services will account for Rs. 157.37 crores and civil expenditure forRs. 165.16 crores.1023. Defence Services. - Following the customary procedure I shall first deal
with the Defence estimates. The Defence Budget for the coming year shows an increaseof Rs. 1.94 crores over the revised estimate for the current year, the excess in which Ilargely ascribed to the operations in Kashmir. The House may well ask why with the
cease fire in Kashmir there is no decrease in the Defence Budget. The main reason for
this is that the reduction in the strength of the armed forces cannot be made over-nightand the process of demobilisation has necessarily to be spread over a period similar tothe recruitment and training of the forces. The current year’s revised estimates reflectthe expenditure on the gradual building up of our strength while the budget for nextyear would reflect the gradual reduction in that strength. Since both the processes take
time the average strength of the troops during the budget year is unlikely to differ
materially from that in the current year. In framing the budget for next year we havetaken into account the improvement in the Kashmir situation following the cease-fireand our hope that this cease-fire will eventually lead to a peaceful solution of the problem.The House will naturally not expect me to go into greater detail in this matter but I mustutter a warning that if for any unforeseen reason these hopes on which we have based
our estimates are not realised, it may be necessary to exceed the provision now proposed.
It has also to be remembered that the recent grant of an ad hoc dearness allowance toemployees of the Central Government has added Rs. 4 crores to the Defence Budgetnext year. The budget for next year also includes additional provision for the expansionof the Navy and the Air Force. As the House is aware, our Navy till recently consisted
of only a few sloops and frigates designed primarily for port defence but with the
achievement of independence the Navy has been called upon to shoulder greaterresponsibilities than before, for which it is necessary to have a balanced force, completewith aircraft carriers, cruisers, destroyers and submarines. With this end in view,Government have recently approved the first phase of a 10-year plan for the Navy,confined mainly to the recruitment and training of the personnel in the various branches
of the Navy. The last war proved conclusively the overwhelming importance of the
fleet air arm and the House will be glad to know that a beginning has already been madein this respect and that the budget includes provision for the establishment of a fleet airarm. With regard to the Air Forces also, plans for their expansion and development aregoing forward. It is hoped to train sufficient technical manpower to make it a morebalanced and effective force.
24. Before I pass on to civil estimates I would like to refer to a change in the
preparation of the Defence Demands for next year. The provision for supplies and storeswhich was previously pooled together and included under one Demand for all the threeServices, except for certain Naval and Air Force stores, has now been split among thethree Services-Army, Navy and Air Force. This change will make the estimates for eachService self-contained to a greater extent than before and enable the Defence authorities
to exercise a closer and more efficient control over the expenditure in their respective
Services.1125. Civil Estimates. - I now come to the Civil Estimates. Details of the estimates
under individual heads are, as usual, given in the Explanatory Memorandum circulatedwith the budget papers and it is unnecessary for me to deal with them at any considerablelength here. I should like, however, to refer briefly to certain special items for whichprovision is included in these estimates. The budget next year includes Rs. 9.85 croresfor the relief and rehabilitation of refugees. In addition, a provision of Rs. 23.27 crores
has been made in the capital budget, Rs. 21.34 crores for loans for rehabilitation includingloans to Provincial Governments and the Rehabilitation Finance Administration andRs. 1.93 crores for buildings. The expenditure on food subsidies and the payment ofbonus on procurement under the revised policy is estimated at Rs. 32.97 crores next
year. The estimates also include Rs. 10~crores for the meeting of pre-partition claims
and Rs. 12.83 crores under the various heads of expenditure for development schemes.
26. Of the total expenditure of Rs. 165.16 crores provided in the budget for the
year, Rs. 52.82 crores are accounted for by the expenditure on refugees, the paymentfor food subsidies and pre-partition payments, leaving Rs. 112.34 crores for normalexpenditure. This includes Rs. 10.06 crores for tax collection. Rs. 41.97 crores for
obligatory expenditure on payment of interest and pensions and provision for debt
redemption, Rs. 2.04 crores for planning and resettlement Rs. 2.23 crores for expenditureon Currency and Mint. Rs. 2.95 crores for grants-in-aid to Provincial Governments andRs. 24.20 crores for expenditure in the nation building spheres such as Education,Medical and Public Health, Broadcasting, Aviation and on Scientific Surveys and
institutions in which the Central Government largely supplement the work of Provincial
Governments. The balance of Rs. 28.89 crores represents the provision for administration,Civil Works, etc. and represents only 17.5 per cent of the total civil expenditure. Inaddition to Rs. 24.20 crores in the national building spheres mentioned above, provisionhas also been made for the grant of Rs. 26.81 crores to Provincial Governments fordevelopment and Rs. 49.25 crores for loans.
27. Honourable Members are aware that in recent months a large number of
Indian States have been merged in the neighbouring Indian Provinces or taken over foradministration direct by the Centre as part of the policy of unifying the country underthe guidance of my distinguished colleague the Deputy Prime Minister. Ultimately therevenue and expenditure of these States have to merge in those of the Provinces or theCentre depending on the subject to which they pertain. But the process of integration is
still incomplete and for the present the transactions of these States have been kept
separate in a deposit account and not included in the revenue and expenditure of India.If, as may be hoped, the integration is completed in the course of the coming year, thesetransactions will be included in the revised estimates for the year.
28. On the basis of the estimates of revenue and expenditure that I have
explained so far, the anticipated deficit for next year is Rs. 14.79 crores. I shall return to
the question of how I propose to deal with this deficit in a later part of my speech.1SPEECH OF SHRIMATI INDIRA GANDHI PRIME MINISTER AND
MINISTER OF FINANCE INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR
1970-71
Sir,I rise to present the Budget for the year 1970-71. The annual Budget is the most
important instrument through which we implement our successive Plans fordevelopment.
2. Before I proceed to delineate the broad features of our present economic
situation and of the Budget, I should like to spell out briefly the main. ingredients ofGovernment’s approach.
3. It is generally accepted that social, economic and political stability is not
possible without the growth of productive forces and the augmentation of nationalwealth. Also, that such growth and increase in wealth cannot be sustained without dueregard to the welfare of the weaker sections of the community.
4. Therefore, it is necessary to devise policies which reconcile the imperatives
of growth with concern for the well-being of the needy and the poor. Measures haveto be devised which, while providing welfare, also add momentum to productive forces.Any severance of the vital link between the needs of growth and of distributive justicewill produce stagnation or instability. Both must be avoided.
5. The provision of adequate employment opportunities is not just a welfare
measure. It is a necessary part of the strategy of development in a poor country whichcan ill-afford to keep any resources unutilised or under-utilised. Greater attention todry farming areas is not merely to avoid inequalities in the rural areas. It is also anessential part of any programme to achieve sustained increases in agriculturalproduction. Encouragement to small enterprises and to new entrepreneurs is vital tobuild up managerial and entrepreneurial talent which is all too scarce today. Withoutsome restraint on urban land values and individual ownership of urban property, wecannot adequately develop housing and other amenities necessary to wrest the maximumbenefit from the vast productive investments already made in our over-crowded townsand cities. The weaker sections of the society are also the greatest source of potentialstrength. We cannot provide for all the urgent needs of society with our limitedresources. But a balance has to be struck between outlays which may be immediatelyproductive and those which are essential to create and sustain a social and politicalframework which is conducive to growth, in the long.
6. Economic conditions in the country at present permit and indeed require
a more vigorous effort to stimulate growth. During 1969-70, the first year of the2Fourth Plan, there is every likely hood of achieving an over-all rate of growth of 5 to
51/2 per cent. The modernisation of Indian agriculture is well on its way; and it has led
to a substantial recovery in industrial production. There has been a welcome increase
in foreign exchange reserves; and the general level of prices over the past two years
has been relatively stable. At the same time, it is necessary to set up new capacity ina number of fields in order to sustain growing levels of consumption, exports and
employment.
7. If the opportunities for growth, which are now available, are to be seized
fully, the Central and State Governments must make adequate provision for
developmental outlays in the coming year. Private investment in agriculture, small
industry and construction has been buoyant for some time now; and there is a revivalof interest in investment in organised industry. A decisive increase in Plan outlay in
the public sector will also stimulate productive investment in the private sector.
8. Apart from providing for a significantly higher Plan outlay, the Budget
for 1970-71 makes special provision for a number of schemes which combine an
element of social welfare with future growth potential.
9. It is with this positive approach to problems of growth with stability and
social justice, that we have sought to give new emphasis and a new sense of urgency to
economic policy in recent months. The nationalisation of banks, for which there is
overwhelming support in this Honourable House and the country at large, will, I amsure, be soon put on a stable footing. The Monopolies Act and the decisions that the
Government have already taken in the light of the recommendations of the Industrial
Licensing Policy Inquiry Committee should help to avoid the concentration of economicpower and provide encouragement to small and new entrepreneurs. At the same time,
well -established industrial companies will be able to participate in the core sector and
in industries with export orientation. It has also been decided that Government as wellas financial institutions should assume special responsibility to promote industrial
development in selected backward areas. The Fourth Plan, as it is now being revised,
will take particular care to look after some of the urgent socio-economic requirements,such as the development of suitable techniques for dry farming areas, greater employment
opportunities for landless labour, the adequate supply of drinking water and the
improvement of urban environment in many of our congested metropolitan areas.
10. According to Revised Estimates, the deficit at the Centre for 1969-70 is
now estimated to be Rs.290 crores as against the Budget Estimates of Rs.254 crores.
The transfer to State Governments, on account of their share in Central taxes andduties, has increased by Rs.104 crores over the Budget Estimates, largely as a result
of the Finance Commission’s award. A substantial provision of Rs.275 crores by way
of non-Plan assistance to the States had also to be made so as to enable them to carryout their Plan programmes. As a result of continued decline in imports, collection3under import duties and disbursements under external aid are not likely to come up to
Budget Estimates. On the other hand, collections under income-tax and non-tax revenues
and receipts from market loans will be larger.
11. Since several States continue to have gaps in resources, it would be prudent
to provide in advance for special assistance to them. Accordingly, it is proposed toprovide Rs. 175 crores in the Budget next year to cover the gaps in the resources ofcertain States since otherwise it would be difficult for them to undertake worthwhilePlan programmes. Provision for Plan assistance to the States is also being increasedfrom Rs.615 crores this year to Rs.635 crores next year. If State Governments are ableto raise additional resources and keep a careful watch on non-Plan expenditure, it shouldbe possible for them to increase their Plan outlay from roughly Rs.950 crores this yearto about Rs.115 0 crores next year, i. e. an increase of the order of 2 0 per cent.
12. It is proposed to raise Central Plan outlays, including those on centrally
sponsored schemes from Rs.1223 crores this year to Rs.1411 crores next year, i. e. byroughly 15 per cent. The Centre’s Plan next year provides Rs.39 crores more foragriculture and allied programmes, Rs.84 crores more for transport and communications,Rs.31 crores more for power and Rs.28 crores more for social services, includingfamily planning. The Plan outlay of the Union Territories is also being augmentedfrom Rs.66 crores to Rs.76 crores.
13. Taking the Centre, States and the Union Territories together, the Plan
outlay will increase from Rs.2239 crores in 1969-70 to Rs.2637 crores in 1970-71 i e.by about Rs.400 crores. At this stage, this represents a substantial effort to acceleratethe pace of development. In addition to the Plan provisions made in the Budget,institutional finance to assist industry and agriculture will also be mobilised on alarger scale next year. With the considerable step up in Plan outlay and the increasedprovision of institutional finance, there should be significant increase in employmentopportunities in the coming year.
14. Programmes of rural development which will be given special emphasis,
with the help of Plan provisions and Institutional. Finance, are summarised in amemorandum which is being separately circulated to Honourable Members. Thismemorandum also outlines some of the new initiatives which we propose to take inorder to combine growth with a greater regard for the welfare of the most needysections of society. I shall, therefore, refer to them only briefly here.
(a) Special schemes for small farmers are being taken up in 45 districts and
research on dry farming techniques is being accelerated.
(b) It is proposed to provide next year a sum of Rs.25 crores for selected rural
works programmes particularly in areas which are prone to famine. Thisprovision will be outside the Plan and will form part of the amount setaside for drought relief during the year.4(c) An Urban Development Corporation with an authorised share capital of
Rs.10 crores is being set up. The Corporation will borrow in the market tosupplement its share capital and to set up a revolving fund for financingactivities, such as slum clearance, housing and urban land development.
(d) A substantial provision has been made in the Fourth Plan for the supply of
drinking water. I have written to the Chief Ministers that the bulk of thisprovision should be used to provide drinking water to those areas whichhave no easy access to this basic requirement rather than to improveexisting facilities in bigger towns.
To provide more comprehensive benefits to industrial workers, who are
liable to pay contribution to the Employees Provident Fund at the rate of8 per cent of their pay, it is proposed that a part of the contribution ofemployers and employees should be supplemented by a contribution fromthe Government to make up a separate fund from which family pensionsas well as a lump sum payment in the event of death will be provided.
(f) The minimum pension as also family pension for Central Government
employees is proposed to be increased to Rs.40 per month. This decisionwill apply to those receiving’ pension at present as well as to those entitledto pensions in future. For industrial employees also, the scheme, to whichI referred earlier, provides for a minimum family pension of Rs.40 permonth.
(g) To supplement existing schemes for school-feeding and the like, a
beginning is being made with a programme to meet the nutritionalrequirements of the age group 0-3. A provision of Rs.4 crores is beingmade in the Budget for children in tribal development blocks and in cityslums. From time to time, the programme will be extended with the helpof specially designed schemes to raise additional resources.
15. At the existing rates of taxation, revenue receipts are likely to increase
from Rs.3587 crores this year to Rs.3867 crores next year. After allowing for statutorytransfer to the States, the revenue receipts available to the Centre will increase fromRs.2965 crores to Rs.3167 crores. Revenue expenditure next year is expected to increaseby Rs.176 crores, of which Rs.68 crores is on Plan schemes and Rs.108 crores on non-Plan items. Total non-Plan expenditure has been restricted to the minimum and willincrease by about 4 per cent.
16. Honourable Members will also be glad to note that the internal resources
of public sector enterprises, which are available for their expansion, will increasefrom Rs.162 crores this year to Rs.2 02 crores next year. Market loans are estimatedat Rs.162 crores next year as against Rs.141 crores in the current year. Receipts underPL 480 and other food aid, including some on revenue account, are expected to decline5from Rs.239 crores this year to Rs.161 crores in 1970-71. Receipts under other aid
should be more or less of the same order as this year. Taking account of all otheritems, including the provision for the Plan and for special assistance to the Statesoutside the Plan, the capital account will show a deficit of Rs.365 crores. The revenueaccount is expected to show a marginal surplus of Rs.15 crores.
17. With growing prosperity in rural areas, it has become all the more important
to tap rural savings for further development. Schemes to mobilise savings for a specificpurpose are likely to have greater appeal. A model scheme of debentures to be issuedby State, sponsored institutions has, therefore, been prepared and it is hoped that ruraldebentures, floated in accordance with the scheme, will be an additional instrumentfor the orderly mobilisation of rural savings. The extension of banking to rural areaswill serve the same purpose. Even today, our postal system extends to many areaswhich cannot be- covered by banks in the near future. The postal system, therefore,also needs to be harnessed for greater mobilisation of savings. At present our smallsavings schemes, including Post Office Savings Bank accounts, otter facilities forsavings with a number of tax concessions. These tax concessions, however, are not ofmuch interest to the rural population or to low income groups, which by and large, arenot subject to taxation of income. To these groups, a higher rate of interest would bemore attractive than a lower rate with corresponding tax Concessions. Accordingly, itis proposed to introduce a new series of time deposits, recurring deposits and savingscertificates, which will carry higher rates of interest without any special tax concessions.The present tax-free  facilities will also be continued with slightly higher rates of
interest. The rates of interest on contributions to the General Provident Fund and thePublic Provident Fund are also being enhanced  slightly. I shall have occasion later to
refer to some changes in our direct tax structure, which are designed to promotehigher savings. A memorandum giving the full details of all these changes is beingseparately circulated.
PART ‘B’
18. The expenditure proposals for 1970-71 which I have just presented have
been aimed at stimulating growth while providing for some measures of social welfarefor the less privileged sections of the community. The same considerations of growthwith social justice must govern the  manner in which resources are raised to meet the
requirements of Government .
19. In a country like India, where Government assumes the major part of the
responsibility for the promotion of capital formation, the Government Budget shouldyield a substantial revenue surplus to take care of a part of the needs on capitalaccount. This is all the more so at a time when net receipts under foreign aid and1SPEECH OF PROF. MADHU DANDA V ATE MINISTER OF FINANCE
INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1990-91
Sir,
1. I deem it a great privilege to have the opportunity to present the first
Budget of the new Government.
2. Over a hundred days ago winds of political change swept the country. The
new Government, which secured a massive vote of confidence of this HonourableHouse, transcending political affiliations, made a tryst with the nation to respect andimplement the mandate it received from the people.
3. Let me, at the outset, deal with the economic situation that we inherited
from the previous Government. I do so not in a spirit of acrimony but with a view torevealing to the House the ground realities. The Central Government’s budgetary deficitwas Rs.13,790 crores as on Ist December, 1989, a level nearly double the deficitprojected for the whole year in the 1989-90 budget. Wholesale prices had risen by 6.6per cent since the beginning of the financial year. The balance of payment was understrain and foreign exchange reserves (excluding gold and SDRs) were down to aroundRs.5000 crores. Stocks of foodgrains had fallen to 11 million tonnes.
4. On a broader scale, the Economic Survey which was placed on the Table
of the House only a few days ago deals with the current economic situation. I will notgo into details but only highlight a few key points.
5. There has been some slowing down of growth in 1989-90. GDP is expected
to rise by 4 to 4.5 per cent, industrial output by about 6 per cent and agriculturaloutput by 1 per cent or so on the peak level reached in the previous year.
6. The price rise this year affects several commodity groups and the pressure
of inflation is clearly linked to the fiscal imbalance. The budget deficit and moneysupply growth have been running well above target. The Revised Estimates for 1989-
90, which I will present a little later, indicate that the budget deficit is expected to be
substantially higher than Rs.7337 crores projected in the budget estimates for 1989-90. The growth rate of aggregate monetary resources was 16.5 per cent from thebeginning of the financial year to 23rd February, 1990.
7. As regards the trade performance this year, exports have grown at the rate
of 38 per cent and imports at 21 per cent in rupee terms in the first nine months of the
year. But the pressure on reserves continues as the improvement on trade account is
not sufficient to counter-balance the increase in debt-service obligations.28. I have drawn attention to these features in order to highlight the constraints
within which the new Government has to look for ways of fulfilling its mandate.
9. The first task of the new Government was to contain the rise in prices. A
Cabinet Committee on Prices was formed and effective steps were taken to increasethe supply of essential commodities, break the inflationary psychology and containinflation. The price situation, however, remains a matter for concern and themanagement of inflation is one of the priority areas for this Government.
10. Adequate stocks of foodgrains are essential for maintaining price stability
and our economic security. The Government has given a high priority to stepping upprocurement efforts and to rebuilding of stocks. As a result, the procurement of ricehas touched a new high of about 10 million tonnes already. Foodgrains stocks in thecentral pool have been augmented and stand at 11.67 million tonnes at the beginningof February compared to 8.34 million tonnes at the same time last year. Special attentionhas been given to increasing supplies of essential commodities and streamlining thePublic Distribution System. Market intervention operations are being undertaken tostabilise open market prices of some sensitive commodities.
11. Another major problem before the country is the strain on our balance of
payments position. In the last few years, large trade and current account deficits havebeen financed through depletion of foreign exchange reserves and growing recourseto foreign borrowings. To combat the pressures on the balance of payments and toensure a viable situation over the Eighth Plan period, exports must command the
highest priority. The alternative of higher foreign borrowing to finance our essential
import requirements runs the risk of mortgaging our hard won economic independence.This is clearly unacceptable. Therefore, the new Import Export Policy 1990-93, to beannounced on 1.4.1990, will accord top priority to exports and will give specialencouragement for exports which earn high net foreign exchange. The priority forexports will also be reflected in our industrial policy and later I will outline some
fiscal measures to promote export production.
12. Our import bill for bulk items is increasing rapidly. The oil consumption,
for example, has been rising at the rate of around 8 per cent in the recent past. There
has been a huge outflow of foreign exchange on this account. India’s foreign debt has
been doubled in the last five years. This has added to our vulnerability. The trend has
to be reversed. I am convinced that our people will make any sacrifice and meet any
challenge in order to preserve our economic independence and spirit of self-reliance.We are ready to go through a period of austerity and hardship in order to avoid excessive
foreign borrowings.
13. The fiscal imbalance is the root cause of the twin problems of inflation
and the difficult balance of payments position. One of the targets of the Seventh FiveYear Plan which was over achieved was deficit financing. While the projected deficitin the 7th Plan period was Rs.14000 crores, in reality it was more than double.314. The management of the deficit will require the containment of expenditure
growth. 1 can assure the House that we will spare no effort to reduce the burden ofadministrative expenditure. * But the restraint of expenditure also requires carefulconsideration of other areas of public spending which involve implicit or explicitsubsidies. We have to ask ourselves whether these subsidies are really reaching thepeople they are meant to serve or whether there is a better way of providing the samebenefit.
15. On the revenue side, the real issue is of tax compliance. Tax evasion is
rampant. This generates black money and has other serious adverse effects on theeconomy, such as fuelling inflation and conspicuous consumption. Black money isalso generated by shortages, artificially pegged prices and detailed physical controls.The “leakages” from public expenditure programmes also cause serious distortions inthe economic and social structure of our society.
16. We will launch a sustained and multi-pronged drive against proliferation
of black money which is a social sin and an economic evil. To improve tax compliance,we shall combine reasonable tax rates and simpler tax laws with effective taxadministration and strong deterrents against evasion. The Revenue Department is being
instructed to pay special attention to vulgar display of ill-gotten wealth, particularly
on occasions, such as wedding receptions. We will come down with a heavy hand onthose who give vent to their pomp and money power, by circumventing our laws andfrittering away the scarce resources of the nation. The Economic Intelligence Bureauis being revamped to coordinate action against tax evaders and black money operators.
The Act on “benarni” transactions will be recast to make it more difficult for economic
offenders to hold wealth in “benami” forms.
17. Administrative curbs against black money must be backed by economic
measures. We must reduce the scope of discretionary powers which provide sustenanceto black money. Our economic policies will place greater reliance on general, non-discretionary, fiscal and financial instruments and will reduce the role of ad hoc
discretionary physical controls.
18. I have also received some suggestions from Honourable Members and
fiscal experts on incentive scheme for “unearthing” of black money and channelling itinto desired directions. The advantage claimed for such schemes is that, instead ofbeing used for conspicuous consumption or unproductive investment, the unaccountedmoney can be diverted to create jobs or to serve some other socially useful purpose.The disadvantage is that these schemes generally provide for a more concessional taxtreatment of the black money than the rates normally applicable. The different schemestried out in the past did not yield much and were open to misuse. Human ingenuitymanifests itself in strange ways. In the past, it found expression in converting thebearer bonds, issued with the laudable objective of bringing out black money, intoalternate currency that exchanged hands at a premium. Thus the instrument to render4black money white was itself used with vengeance to reconvert white money into
black!
19. Nevertheless, in the present situation, when our needs are large and
resources are tight, there is perhaps a case for introducing a time-bound scheme whichwould permit undeclared incomes and hidden wealth to be used for one or more socialpurposes, such as, slum clearance, building of houses for lower and middle incomegroups, and setting up of specified agro-based industries in rural/backward areas.Subject to certain conditions, the source of monies declared under this scheme neednot be questioned. There could be a suitable flat rate of tax on such income.
20. The Government would like to have a thorough debate in the Parliament
before introducing a scheme of this type. I would very much welcome the views of theHonourable Members during the budget debate. In the light of these discussions theGovernment will take the final decision.
21. Domestic trade in gold is regulated under the Gold Control Act which
was introduced in 1963 with the broad objective of curbing the demand for gold. TheAct has been largely ineffective. It has also caused hardship and harassment to smallgoldsmiths. There is not much point in continuing with such an ineffective legislation.
The Government, therefore, proposes to abolish the Gold Control Act. This step would
benefit many artisans and small goldsmiths all over the country. At the same time, wewill use the Customs Act more vigorously to prevent smuggling of gold.
22. Let me now turn to some issues of long-term development.23. In the traditional growth pattern, while the poor at the grass root level
suffered in silence without much benefit of growth trickling down to them, the affluent
at the. top lived in splendid isolation and monopolised most of the gains of economicgrowth. The new Government rejects this trickle down theory of development. Instead,it would work for growth with equity ensured through employment oriented planningin which the decentralised institutions, of the four pillars state, aptly described by Dr.Ram Manohar Lohia as the ‘Choukhamba Raj’ will play a pivotal role.
24. Our first priority is employment In the eighties, our economy grew at
around 5 per cent or more. But, according to a recent report of the National SampleSurvey the number of persons who are chronically unemployed increased from 8million in 1983 to 12 million in 1987-88. In addition, there are a vast number who areunderemployed and whose earnings from work fall well short of a decent minimum.We believe that “every citizen has the right to productive and gainful work in order tolive meaningfully and with dignity”. We would like to introduce an EmploymentGuarantee Scheme. However, the cost of doing so in all parts of the country are huge,and we do not have the necessary resources at this juncture. Nevertheless, it is proposedto make a beginning on an Employment Guarantee Scheme for the drought proneareas and areas with an acute problem of rural unemployment The allocation for the5employment schemes of the Department of Rural Development will be supplemented,
to the extent feasible, during the course of the year.
25. Faster growth of agriculture must be an important part of this strategy. We
have achieved impressive growth in yields in the areas of good irrigation but yieldsremain very low in large harts of the country which are rainfed or semi-arid. Ourstrategy for agricultural development must focus on increasing output in these areasthrough greater investment in irrigation, land development, and soil and moistureconservation. These investments will increase production. They will also generategreater absorption of labour in agriculture. Parallel to this effort, regions of highproductivity should aim at diversification of agriculture and development of agro-based processing industries. This will provide the economic linkages between therural economy and growing markets in urban areas, as well as potential markets abroad.
26. The country had adopted an Industrial Policy Resolution in 1956, which
through the years, has governed our broad strategy for industrial development. It issurprising that there is no similar Agricultural Policy Resolution. Ibis Governmentwill remove this lacuna. We will lay the basic foundations of agricultural developmentthrough the adoption of an Agricultural Policy Resolution. This will represent ournational commitment in respect of a sector which is the hub of our economy. Weinvite all sections of the people to interact with the Government on the formulation ofthis Policy Resolution.
27. We are committed to ensuring that 50 per cent of the investible resources
are deployed for the development of agriculture and rural development We have madea beginning, in this year’s Central Plan in which the share of the rural sector inbudgetary support for the Central Plan will go up from 44 per cent in 1989-90 to 49per cent in 1990-91. In addition, on the non-Plan side we are providing Rs.1000 crores
for debt relief, and Rs.4000 crores for the fertilizer subsidy, which also go to benefit
rural areas.
28. The steps for the inclusion of the land reforms legislation in the Ninth
Schedule of the Constitution have already been initiated and the necessary constitutionalamendment will be introduced. Simultaneously, various measures for the restructuringof the land relations are being worked out and we hope to initiate steps in this direction
after due consultation with the State Governments.
29. Over the years, poor farmers, artisans and weavers have accumulated debt
which they are unable to repay. They have been caught up in a vicious circle ofindebtedness and low incomes which keeps them in perennial poverty. In order torelieve our farmers from the burden of debt, an assurance was given in the NationalFront’s manifesto that relief will be provided to farmers with loans upto Rs.10,000 as
on 2nd October, 1989. I am glad to inform the House that we are now ‘ ready with the
scheme of implementation of debt relief to fulfil the promise, and redeem the pledgegiven to the kisans and artisans.630. It is proposed to introduce a scheme for providing debt relief which will
have the following features. The relief will be available to borrowers who have takenloans upto Rs.10,000 from public sector banks and Regional Rural Banks. The reliefwill cover all overdues as on 2nd October, 1989 including short-term as well as termloans. There will be no limit on the size of the borrower’s land holdings. However,wilful defaulters, who in the past did not repay loans despite their capacity to do so,will be excluded. The Central Government will compensate the public sector banksand Regional Rural Banks suitably for the debts which are thus written off. Many ofthose who filed insolvency petitions and had taken loans below Rs.10,000 which wereoverdue as of 2nd October, 1989 will also be covered under the scheme.
31. The State Governments may also wish to introduce a scheme on the same
lines in respect of cooperative banks within their purview. Subject to the constraint ofresources, the Central Government will consider suggestions for helping StateGovernments in implementing a debt relief scheme on the same pattern in respect ofcooperative credit institutions under their control.
32. I consider the debt relief measure as a positive step which will enable our
farmers, artisans and weavers to increase their productivity. It is at the same timenecessary to ensure that there is no erosion of the credibility of the banking system.Once the past over-dues are cleared, it is reasonable to expect that loans taken forcurrent operations will be serviced promptly. The Scheme should contribute to better
agricultural recoveries and better identification of wilful defaulters, who do not deserve
any sympathy. Banks are being asked to set up a system of maintaining a proper credithistory of their borrowers covered under the Scheme. The Government would alsolike to make it clear that the Scheme will not be extended nor will it be repeated.
33. The Government proposes to introduce changes in the formula for
computing costs of production of agricultural crops for price fixation so as to take full
account of all costs. In particular the formula will take into account
(1) valuation of labour (including family labour) on the basis of statutory
minimum wage, or actual wage, whichever is higher,
(2) the remuneration for the managerial and entrepreneurial efforts of the
farmer,
(3) adjustment of procurement/support prices for the escalation in input costs
between the announcement of the prices and the arrival of the crop in the
market.
The new formula will be reflected in the procurement support prices to be
announced for the next kharif season. As procurement prices are revised in line withcosts, the revision of issue prices is also unavoidable. In future, the Government willannounce revision in procurement and issue prices at the same time even though these
may take effect on different dates.734. The threat to our environment can no more be ignored. It has been estimated
that around 130 million hectares of land is degraded through soil erosion, salinity,total loss of tree cover, etc. Our forests are under pressure from a variety of sources.In urban areas, air and water pollution from industry, transport and other sources iswidespread. A healthy environment is part of the quality of life and a productiveenvironment is the basis for development. Our emphasis on rural development anddecentralisation will allow us to integrate environmental considerations into the designof development.
35. Let me now turn to another area of great concern-that of unemployed
youth. All of us who travel in our constituencies have seen the plight of young peopleable and willing to work, but unable to find employment. A long-term solution to thisproblem has to come from a shift to a more employment-oriented growth strategy. Butas an immediate step we have decided to give a boost to measures which will assistthe youth of this country to acquire the skills that will improve their prospects forgainful employment. A comprehensive V ocational Training Project has been taken upcovering 28 States and Union Territories. The Project will improve the quality ofcraftsmen training, apprenticeship training and advanced training of industrial workers.We also propose to link training and the provision of credit support for self-employment.
36. Under the leadership of Dr. B.R. Ambedkar thousands belonging to the
Scheduled Castes had embraced Buddhist religion in 1956 to seek liberation fromcaste oppression to which they were subjected for centuries. However, in the eyes of
the orthodoxy the social stigma on the Scheduled Castes was not erased even after
their conversion to Buddhism. It has, therefore, been decided by the Union Governmentthat all the facilities and privileges that were available to the Scheduled Castes will beavailable to them from the Union Government even after their conversion to Buddhism.
37. A strategy for greater absorption of labour in agriculture has to go hand in
hand with faster growth of industry and balanced development of infrastructure,specially power and transport. It is self evident that higher investment and fastergrowth in incomes in agriculture can be sustained only if industrial production increasesto meet the rising demand for inputs and wage goods in particular. This Governmentwill give priority to accelerating industrial growth in a competitive and non-monopolisticenvironment. The Government will review and simplify the Industrial Licensing Policyto ensure that licensing does not become an instrument for preventing competition
and perpetuating monopolies.
38. The Khadi, Village and Small scale sector has a special role to play in any
strategy for employment-oriented industrial development. We will work for theharmonious development of cottage, small and large industries and give protectionagainst encroachment of large scale on small scale and small scale against cottagewherever necessary.839. The withdrawal of the 15 per cent Central Investment Subsidy for
Backward Areas has affected the growth of small scale industries. We must take industryto the people and not people to the industry. We propose to reintroduce a Central
Investment Subsidy for small scale units in rural areas and backward regions.
40. A major problem faced by small industries is delay in the settlement of
bills by large units. The provision of factoring services in which the task of realisation
of the bill is taken on by an intermediary is one way of mitigating this. The House will
be glad to know that some steps towards this end have already been taken by theReserve Bank of India.
41. The problems of women entrepreneurs in the cottage and small sector are
of particular concern to us. The provisions regarding margin money and seed capitalfor women entrepreneurs will be reexamined and liberalised.
42. There is a single window scheme for grant of working capital along with
term assistance to new projects in the small scale sector by State Financial Corporations.This arrangement facilitates setting up of small scale units without waiting for
finalisation of working capital limits from banks. The present limits of project cost for
determining eligibility for such composite loans is being raised from Rs.5 lakhs toRs.10 lakhs.
43. Reserve Bank has issued guidelines for provision of credit and
rehabilitation of viable small scale units. These guidelines, are intended to assist thesmall scale sector and not create hurdles in its path. Banks are being asked to implement
them faithfully.
44. The public sector is vital to our country’s development. It has played a
major role in broadening the base for industrial and technological development in this
country. The overall working results for the first six months of this financial year
show a significant improvement in net profit from Rs.694 crores last year to Rs.1103crores this year. In 1990-91, Central sector enterprises will finance 46 per cent of their
plan investment from internal resources. We are committed to making the public sector
more efficient and result-oriented so that it can generate more surpluses which can beploughed back for development.
45. The health of the public enterprises depends crucially on the commitment
of its employees and their full participation in management. It has been suggested that
one way of securing this is to give workers a share in ownership either through stock
option schemes or sale of shares to workers or to trusts owned by workers. Since theequity of public enterprises is not quoted in the market, arrangements will have to beworked out to determine the sale and purchase price of such worker’s shares. I invite
suggestions from Honourable Members on the merits of this idea and how it could be
implemented.946. We are also firmly committed to the healthy development of capital
markets, and to strengthen the role of public financial institutions. The institutions
will be given functional autonomy. However they must also be accountable for their
actions. The institutions will not be party to corporate battles and clandestine takeovers.The government would like to create an atmosphere and a culture where financialinstitutions can function objectively without fear or favour.
47. There has been some concern about the role of financial institutions in
relation to their intervention in the capital market. I have asked these institutions toframe suitable guidelines so that their actions are not only objective but seen to be so.Each financial institution is expected to operate in the interest of its depositors and
investors consistent with national priorities. There may be occasions when there is an
abnormal and persistent upward or downward movement in share prices because ofconcerted bull or bear pressures. In such situations, the financial institutions will playa stabilising role in the capital market.
48. The growth of banking since nationalisation has been phenomenal. The
banking system has been extended to the remotest part of our country. Banks are nowplaying a vital role in mobilising peoples’ savings and channelling them into productiveareas. At the time of nationalisation, only 14 per cent of the bank credit was provided
for the priority sector covering sections, such as, agriculture, rural development and
small industries and businesses. Today, this proportion is nearly 45 per cent. This isthe measure of the success of nationalisation.
49. There is one aspect of banking operations which is of concern to me. This
is the low credit deposit ratio in some regions. A variety of factors determine this
ratio. I have asked the Reserve Bank of India to pay special attention to this problemand further improve credit delivery in such areas consistent with financial discipline.
50. Our bank managers and employees are, as a group, the most qualified,
dedicated and hard working. But it is also a fact that the level of public satisfaction
with the banking services is not as high as it should be. Over the years, perhaps somestructural rigidities have crept in. These need to be removed. There is need for greatercompetition and greater operational flexibility in respect of banking services. The
banking culture has to be made more responsive to the needs of the public. I am
requesting the Reserve Bank of India to set up a Committee of Bankers, bank employees,depositors and borrowers to consider these aspects and make recommendations to theGovernment.
51. The previous Government had announced the formation of the Securities
Exchange Board of India (SEBI) in 1987. Three years have passed and the legislation
for giving statutory authority to SEBI has not been introduced. We will ensure that
this is done in this budget session.
52. Science and technology is the mainspring of development. We are proud
of the capabilities that we have built up in critical areas like agriculture, space research,10atomic energy and defence. We will aim at utilising the talent of our scientists and
engineers towards two basic ends: ,
- the development of appropriate technologies for agriculture, non-
conventional and renewable energy and other employment intensiveactivities,
- the establishment of a strong base of self reliance in critical areas of
modern technology.
Public spending on R & D, incentives for the use of indigenous technologies
and policies to guide private research efforts will be oriented towards these objectives.
53. There is a large community of Indians settled abroad. They have achieved
tremendous success in their chosen professions and occupations. True to the richtradition of our ancient culture, their physical location has not weakened the strongintellectual, philosophical and social links that they have with the country of theirorigin. The Government will continue to provide special facilities for them to investtheir savings in this country. The procedures will be simplified so that they can functionwith a sense of confidence and in line with declared national policy.
54. Let me now turn to the Revised Estimates for 1989-90 and the Budget
Estimates for 1990-91.
Revised Estimates for 1989-90
55. Revised Estimates of Expenditure for the current year show an increase
of Rs.5620 crores over the Budget Estimates. Of this, Rs.4958 crores are on non-Plan
account and Rs.662 crores on Plan account.
56. Honourable Members are aware of the strains on our security environment
which unfortunately coincide with the strains on our economy. Hence, on the non-Plan side, Defence Services are being provided additional Rs.1500 crores to meettheir essential requirements and committed expenditure. The provision for fertilizersubsidy will be Rs.950 brores more, mainly due to larger imports and clearance of
arrear claims. There is an increase of Rs.276 crores in food subsidy, mainly for clearing
arrears due to Food Corporation of India. An additional provision of Rs.468 crores hasbeen made for export promotion and market development. Interest payments will beRs.710 crores higher. The Government is of the view that the amount of compensationto be paid to the victims of the Bhopal Gas tragedy under Court order is too meagrefor the magnitude of sufferings of these innocent people. The matter is under review
in Court and in the meantime Government have decided to pay interim relief for the
victims for which a provision of Rs.320 crores has been made which, inclusive ofbank interest over a period of 3 years, will amount to Rs.360 crores. The increases arepartly offset by savings in some areas notably in the lump sum provision made fordearness allowance consequent on transfer of liability on this account to the budget ofthe Ministries/Departments.1157. On the Receipt side, while collection from Corporation Tax and Customs
duties are expected to more or less reach Budget estimates, the receipts from Union
excise duties are estimated to be Rs.599 crores less than the budget. Income-tax
collections, on the other hand, are expected to be more by Rs.755 crores. States’ share
of taxes including the sums payable to States on the basis of collection figures certified
by the C&AG for the earlier years are placed at Rs.13232 crores against Rs.12438
crores at the budget stage, i.e. Rs.794 crores more. The shortfall in net revenue receipts
is expected to be more than off set by larger receipts from small savings, provident
fund collections and special deposits of non-government provident funds, etc.
58. The overall deficit for the current year is now estimated at Rs.11750
crores against the budget estimate of Rs.7337 crores.
Budget Estimates for 1990-91
59. The next financial year is the beginning of the Eighth Five Year Plan.
This Government is irrevocably committed to planned economic development, and to
making the plan more meaningful to the people. As a part of the new strategy, in the
next year’s Plan, we have provided more for those programmes and schemes which
benefit the people directly. We have favoured those programmes that create more
jobs, generate self-employment opportunities, improve the living environment in our
villages and strengthen our agriculture. This is the surest route to overcome poverty.
An increase of 31.7 per cent on last year’s budget estimate is being provided for
Agriculture and Allied Services, without taking into account the budget provision of
Rs.1000 crores for the debt relief for farmers, weavers and artisans. The allocation for
anti-poverty programmes, which are spread over different budget heads is being
increased by about 23 per cent over last year’s budget estimate. This includes the
outlay for employment programmes in rural and urban areas which is being increased
by 30 per cent on last year’s budget estimate.
60. We have a firm commitment to accord highest priority to agriculture and
rural development and our thrust and actions are in conformity with that commitment.
61. For the Central Plan 1990-91, I propose an outlay of Rs.39,329 crores - an
increase of Rs.4,883 crores or 14.2 per cent over the current year’s outlay. Of this,
Rs.17,344 crores will be provided as budgetary support and the balance of Rs.21,985
crores will be mobilised by the public sector enterprises through their internal resources
as well as borrowings.
62. For the year 1990-91, an outlay of Rs.905 crores is proposed for the
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation which represents an increase of 17.5 per
cent over the budget estimates for the current year. In addition, I am also proposing an
outlay of Rs.155 crores for agricultural Research and Education compared to the
provision of Rs.110 crores in 1989-90 - an increase of 41 per cent.1263. I have already referred to the intention of the Government to make a
beginning in respect of an Employment Guarantee Scheme. The Annual Plan outlay
proposed for the Department of Rural Development is Rs.3,115 crores. It is my intentionto provide some additional funds, within the constraint of resources, to enable anEmployment Guarantee Scheme to be introduced in selected areas.
64. The Government is pledged to securing a fair deal for the most oppressed,
exploited and deprived sectors of the society, namely, the Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes. It is proposed to make a provision of Rs.320 crores for the schemes
for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Annual Plan 1990-91 as againstRs.269 crores in 1989-90 BE. The Special Central Assistance to Special ComponentPlans and Tribal Sub-Plans of States has also been increased.
65. The Government would intensify the efforts for eradication of illiteracy.
The very fact that millions of voters in the country have to identify the names ofcandidates on the ballot papers only from the election symbols is itself a symbol of theextent of illiteracy. We have made 25 per cent increase in allocation for NationalLiteracy Mission. Special attention to vocational programmes at all levels will begiven. The process of modernisation of technical education, and support to thrust andfrontier areas in science and technology will be maintained. I am proposing an outlayof Rs.865 crores for the Department of Education during 1990-91.
66. In all the programmes of health and family welfare services, special
attention will be paid to the needs of the rural people. I am proposing an outlay ofRs.950 crores for the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for 1990-91
67. The Government attaches great significance to the welfare of the weak,
the poor and the deprived living in the urban areas. Major initiatives for employment,low cost sanitation for liberation of scavengers and provision for night shelters areproposed to be launched. The plan outlay of the Urban Development Sector is beingincreased to Rs.272 crores in 1990-91 from Rs.89 crores in 1989-90BE for this purpose.
68. The Annual Plan outlays for 1990-91 for the infrastructure sectors are
proposed to be stepped up. The outlays for Petroleum and Natural Gas is proposed tobe increased by 18.6 per cent, Railways by 12.4 per tent and Power by about 10
percent.
69. The details regarding Central Plan outlays for these and other sectors are
in the Budget documents. I do not wish to take the time of the House in making myspeech a substitute for the-voluminous budget documents, and thus deprive the Membersof the excitement of reading these documents’.
70. Honourable Members will be happy to know that the Central assistance
for State and UT Plans next year will be Rs.12,848 crores, including the Plan revenuegrants recommended by the Finance Commission as against Rs.10,450 crores excludingdrought assistance provided in Budget Estimates for the current year. Ibis represents
a substantial step up of 22.9 per cent.1371. Budget Estimates for the next year provide Rs.64,515 crores for non-Plan
expenditure as against Rs.59,220 crores in Revised Estimates for the current year. The
main increase next year is under interest payments provision for which goes up from
Rs.17,710 crores this year to Rs.20,850 crores next year.
72. The Government have appointed a Committee to consider the issue of
One Rank One Pension in all its aspects. The Report of the Committee is expected by
end of March, 1990 and government will take further action thereafter.
73. For Defence Services, a provision of Rs.15,750 crores has been made in
the Budget Estimates. This increase in the defence expenditure is not of our choice. Itis the direct result of the situation on our borders.
74. Freedom struggle is indivisible and therefore it has been decided that
those who fought for Goa’s liberation from the Portugese rule will be eligible forUnion Government’s pension and all other benefits available to other freedom fighters.
75. The Ninth Finance Commission has submitted its second report covering
the period 1990-95, a copy of which was laid on the Table of the House last week
along with a statement of decisions of Government on the recommendations. Thesehave been taken into account while framing the Budget for next year. Therecommendations of the Finance Commission accepted by Government will cast an
additional burden of the order of Rs.773 crores on the Central Budget in 1990-91.
76. Government are alive to the important issue of checking proliferation of
Government expenditure especially in non-priority and non-developmental areas. Iam requesting all the Ministries and Departments to absorb the liabilites on account of
additional instalments of D.A. which will be payable next year from within the budget
provisions made for them by effecting economics and eliminating non-essentialexpenditure. I am, therefore, including only a nominal provision of Rs.100 crores inthe next year’s budget as lump sum provision for D.A. This is mainly to meet the
possible requirements of small Departments with limited budgets who may not find it
possible to absorb D.A. increases to the full extent.
77. On the Receipts side, Gross Tax Revenue at the 1989-90 rate of taxation
is estimated at Rs.57988 crores and the net tax revenue after payment to States of theirshare of taxes is placed at Rs.43507 compared to Rs.37798 crores in the Revised
Estimates for die current year.
78. I have taken a credit of Rs.8000 crores on account of market borrowings
as against Rs.7,400 crores in the current year. External assistance net of repayment isexpected to be of the order of Rs.4327 crores in the next year as against Rs.3901crores in the current year. Taking into account the other variations in receipts andexpenditure the overall deficit for next year at the 1989-90 rate of taxation is estimatedat Rs.9165 crores.14PART B
79. Having taxed your patience so far, now let me turn to other areas of
taxation and reliefs for which you must have been waiting impatiently. Let me begin
with my proposals in respect of direct taxes. I am introducing certain major changes
in the rate structure for personal income-tax with a view to providing relief to low andmiddle income groups, and to make the savings linked incentives more equitable for
taxpayers in different income slabs. My first proposal to raise the exemption limit is
in fulfilment of a promise made in the National Front manifesto. I am raising theexemption limit for personal income taxation from Rs.18,000 to Rs.22,000. Roughly,
one million persons will go out of the tax net as a result of this change. In deciding the
new limit, I have had to balance two conflicting considerations. On the one hand, it isa fact that the lower income groups have been affected the most by price rise, and
there is a case to raise the exemption limit. On the other hand, an increase in the limit
narrows the tax base and involves substantial loss of revenue as the benefit of theincrease is spread over all taxpayers, and is not confined to the lower end of the
income levels. Experts have often argued that keeping in view our per capita income,
raising of the exemption limit is not justified. However, as I temperamentally prefer toavoid taking extreme positions, I have chosen the middle course which I believe is fair
and reasonable.
80. As further measure of relief to the lower and middle income groups, I am
extending the lowest rate of 20% from the present limit of Rs.25,000 to Rs.30,000.
81. Last year, a surcharge at the rate of 8 per cent was introduced for financing
employment programmes. Dropping this employment surcharge would have broughtinto question my irrevocable commitment to employment oriented planning. I, therefore,have no choice but to continue this surcharge. This will now be applicable beyondtaxable income of Rs.75,000 as against the present limit of Rs.50,000.
82. As the Honourable Members are aware, the existing schemes of tax
incentive to promote savings are based on deductions from income. A person gets taxrelief at the highest marginal rate of tax applicable to him. Accordingly, it confershigher amount of tax benefit to a person with higher income vis-a-vis a person with a
lower income. With a view to removing this inequity, I propose to introduce a system
of tax rebate on the gross amount of savings under section 80C. Under the new system,a person contributing to provident fund, life insurance, National Savings Certificates,etc. as earlier, will now be entitled to a tax rebate calculated at the rate of 20%, onsuch savings. The maximum tax rebate allowable will be Rs.10,000 generally andRs.14,000 in the case of authors, playwrights, artists, musicians, actors, sportsmenand athletes. This is broadly equivalent to she maximum relief available now. Allpersons will get the same amount of tax benefit on a given amount of savings,irrespective of their levels of income. The low income taxpayer will benefit.1583. Let me illustrate the impact of the above proposals. A person with a salary
income of Rs.3,500 per month, i.e. Rs.42,000 per year, who saves Rs.8,000 per yearin provident fund and insurance presently pays Rs.1,000 per year as tax. Under thenew dispensation, he will not have to pay any tax at all. The upper income group willhave to save Rs.50,000 to get the full relief of Rs.10,000. Under the old system theywould have got the same relief by saving only Rs.39,500. I may mention in passing,that the new system of a uniform tax rebate will also lead to a substantial simplificationin tax deduction at source by employers.
84. As a further incentive to save, I propose to increase the limit available for
the savings incentives under section 80CCA from Rs.30,000 to Rs.40,000. Since thesavings under this are on a ‘netting’ principle and are added back to income whenwithdrawn, the present system of deduction from taxable income will continue.
85. In addition to this, the Equity Linked Savings Scheme (ELSS) announced
last year has how been finalised on a ‘netting’ principle. Investment in units under theScheme, will be eligible for deduction upto a maximum of Rs.10,000 from the totalincome. The annual return on the investment in the units will be eligible for taxconcession under section 80L. On repurchase of the units by the Mutual Funds, the
capital amount representing the cost of the units win be taxed as income in the year of
repurchase and the excess will be liable to tax as capital gains. The Equity LinkedSavings Scheme will eventually replace the present deduction under section 80CC.Meanwhile, this provision is being extended for investments made upto 31st March,1991.
86. In an effort to mitigate in some small measure, the hardship of parents or
guardians of physically handicapped or mentally retarded persons with incomes upto
Rupees sixty thousand per annum, I propose allowing a deduction of Rs.6,000 fromthe parent’s or guardian’s total income to cover expenses on medical treatment, trainingand rehabilitation of such persons.
87. I propose to increase the deduction in respect of professional income
from foreign sources, available to authors, playwrights, artists, musicians, actors and
sportsmen including athletes, from the existing rate of 25% to 50% of the income, or
75% of the foreign exchange brought into India, whichever is higher. In the case ofprofessors, teachers and research workers also, the present provision has been liberalisedto allow deduction of 75% of the foreign exchange brought into India.
88. I will now make my proposals in regard to corporate taxation. The corporate
sector has often claimed that the rate of Corporate Tax is high and that this inhibitsgrowth as well as tax compliance. On closer scrutiny, I find that the rate is onlyseemingly high, because the system provides too many exemptions. After all theadmissible exemptions and deductions, the effective rate falls drastically. Many largeand high profit making companies had been able to escape the tax net and were payingzero tax for a long time. That is why the contribution of the corporate sector to tax16revenue was not commensurate with the profits they earned; nor with the needs of
national development. The tax system also tilted the balance in favour of capitalintensive production.
89. To ensure better tax compliance, I propose a twin strategy. I am abolishing
major incentives like Investment Allowance and Investment Deposit Account with aview to closing the escape route for the corporate sector to go out of the tax net; andhaving closed that route, I propose to fix the tax rate for widely held domestic companiesat 40% with corresponding changes in rates for other domestic companies. This twinstrategy will raise the effective tax rate and will also give substantial additional revenueof Rs.800 crores.
90. The only major deductions that will now be permitted are those relating
to foreign exchange earnings and for setting up new industrial undertakings. Thededuction for setting up new industries is being raised from 25 per cent to 30 per centin the case of companies and from 20 per cent to 25 per cent for others. The periodduring which the benefit can be availed of is being extended from 8 to 10 yew.
91. With the abolition of the major exemptions, there is a case for also
removing the special provision regarding tax on minimum profits contained in section115 of the Income-tax Act. Accordingly, I propose to discontinue that provision witheffect from the assessment year 1991-92.
92. I am also introducing an important change in the taxation of inter-corporate
dividends. At present 60% of the dividend income received by a domestic company
from another is exempt from tax. There is a tendency towards holding of personalwealth in the form of companies which are in effect closely-held. In order to encouragegenuine investment activity while at the same time discouraging the use of corporateframework for holding personal wealth, I propose to exempt dividends received bydomestic companies from other domestic companies to the full extent to which they
themselves declare dividends during the relevant period. However, scheduled banks
and public financial institutions would, in substance, continue to be governed by theprovisions of section 80M as they presently stand.
93. The result of the reform of the corporate tax system proposed by me will
be to increase the buoyancy, simplify the tax structure and make it neutral as betweensmall and large companies. At the same time, it will provide strong incentive for
export and for investment in new industrial undertakings.
94. Many small scale industries are organised as partnerships. I propose to
raise their exemption limit from Rs.10,000 to Rs.15,000 and to lower the tax ratessuitably.
95. Restoration of ecologically degraded areas fulfils the objectives of
employment generation, enhances the supply of fuel wood and fodder and alsocontributes to the overall social, economic and environmental stability of the rural17areas. In order to promote afforestation, I propose to extend the provisions of section
35CCB and section 80GGA to taxpayers who contribute to a fund or programme for
afforestation approved by the prescribed authority.
96. As in the case of personal income tax. I propose to continue the existing
surcharge of 8% on corporate taxpayers also on all incomes above Rs.75,000.
97. I also propose to make a major change in the taxation of gifts. At present,
gifts are taxed in the hands of the donor, but there is no limit on the amount which a
donee can show as having been received by way of gifts. Because of this, the mechanism
of gifts is used to split up capital and launder black money. Some instances have also
come to notice recently where attempts have been made to explain away wasteful and
ostentatious expenditure on marriage receptions and other functions as having been
financed out of gifts. With a view to curbing such practices, I have decided to substitute
the present gift-tax on donors with a donee based gift-tax. Any person, who claims his
assets or his expenditures as having been financed from gifts, will now be liable to a
gift-tax on a graduated scale. Thus he will have the pleasure of transferring a part of
his bounty as a gift to the exchequer.
98. The primary purpose of the donee-based gift-tax is not to raise revenue
but to check tax evasion and conspicuous consumption. In order to take care of
legitimate gifts, there will be a basic exemption limit of Rs.20,000 per year. In the
case of total gifts exceeding Rs.20,000 but not exceeding Rs.50,000, gift-tax will be
levied at 20 per cent; for total gifts exceeding Rs.50,000 but not exceeding Rs.2,00,000
at 30 per cent; and for total gifts exceeding Rs.2,00,000 at 40 per cent. In addition, I
also propose to allow for a substantially higher limit of rupees one lakh for gifts
received from all sources by an individual at the time of marriage. Further, gifts
received in foreign exchange through official channels will also be exempt.
99. I propose to make the new system applicable in respect of gifts made on
or after 20th March, 1990. Consequently, the existing Gift-Tax Act taxing the gifts in
the hands of donors will cease to be operative in respect of gifts made on or after that
date.
100. Legislation to give effect to this new scheme is proposed to be introduced
during the current session of Parliament.
101. I do not propose to take up the time of the House with other minor changes
in the Direct Tax Laws.
102. As I mentioned earlier, there will be a gain in revenue from corporate tax
to the extent of Rs.800 crores. The loss in revenue from income-tax other than corporate
tax after providing for better compliance is expected to be Rs.250 crores. There will,
therefore, be an additional accrual of Rs.550 crores in respect of direct taxes.18103. Sir, I shall now deal with my proposals relating to indirect taxes. The
main thrust of the proposals is on simplification and rationalisation. Simultaneously,I have also attempted to mobilise some resources in a manner dud does not hurt the
common man and at the same time helps to curb elitist consumption. A major emphasis
has been on strengthening impulses for growth and exports. Significant changes induty structure are also proposed to develop a quality culture in our industry. I have
also not failed to give relief to the deserving sectors, particularly small scale industry,
agriculture and environmental protection. All these measures have been described insome detail in the Explanatory Memorandum to the Finance Bill and I shall deal
briefly with the more important of these proposals.
104. Presently, the import duty rates are widely dispersed. With a view to
rationalising the rates and bringing down their multiplicity, the total of the basic and
auxiliary duty rates of customs are being placed in a limited number of slots in the
range of zero to 125% in respect of most items. Further, as a step towards rationalisationand simplification of the Central Excise Tariff, the duty rates are proposed to be recast
for a large number of goods. Though as a result of the rationalisation, the duty rates
on certain commodities may marginally go up or down, the proposals on the whole areintended to be broadly revenue neutral. The reduction in 6e number of rates in each
Chapter of the Tariff will simplify assessment. It will be our endeavour to ensure a
measure of stability for the ad valorem rates.
105. First, I shall take up the proposals which are in the nature of concessions
in customs and excise duties.
106. Agriculture is a priority area in our framework of development and tax
rates are already kept low on most of the inputs used in this sector. Specified pesticides
and pesticide intermediates enjoy concessional rates of import duty of 70% and 60%respectively. I propose to reduce the import duty on a few more specified bulk pesticidesand pesticide intermediates to these levels. The proposal involves a revenue loss ofabout Rs.16 crores.
107. In order to encourage the use of rape-seed oil and mustard oil, of which
there is an abundant production in the country, I propose to completely exempt refinedrape-seed oil and mustard oil which are currently attracting excise duty of Rs.750 pertonne. The revenue loss on account of this proposal is estimated to be Rs.8 crores.
108. I propose to remove excise duty on pickles altogether in the hope that this
will lend some flavour and spice to my budget.
109. Excise duty on coffee is presently levied at the rates of Rs.78 and Rs.105
per quintal depending upon the variety. As a measure of relief to the coffee growers,
I propose to reduce the duty to a uniform level of Rs.50 per quintal. This concession
involves a revenue loss of Rs.4 crores.1
Budget 1991-92
Speech of
Shri Manmohan Singh
Minister of Finance
24th July, 1991
PART A
Sir,
I rise to present the budget for 1991-92. As I rise, I am overpowered by a
strange feeling of loneliness. I miss a handsome, smiling, face listening intently tothe Budget Speech. Shri Rajiv Gandhi is no more. But his dream lives on; his
dream of ushering India into the twenty-first century; his dream of a strong, united,
technologically sophisticated but humane India. I dedicate this budget to his inspiringmemory.
2 . The new Government, which assumed office barely a month ago, inherited
an economy in deep crisis. The balance of payments situation is precarious.
International confidence in our economy was strong until November 1989 when
our Party was in office. However, due to the combined impact of political instabilitywitnessed thereafter, the accentuation of fiscal imbalances and the Gulf crisis,
there was a great weakening of international confidence. There has been a sharp
decline in capital inflows through commercial borrowing and non-resident deposits.
As a result, despite large borrowings from the International Monetary Fund in July
1990 and January 1991, there was a sharp reduction in our foreign exchange
reserves. We have been at the edge of a precipice since December 1990 and more
so since April 1991. The foreign exchange crisis constitutes a serious threat to thesustainability of growth processes and orderly implementation of our development
programmes. Due to the combination of unfavourable internal and external factors,
the inflationary pressures on the price level have increased very substantially since
mid-1990. The people of India have to face double digit inflation which hurts most
the poorer sections of our society. In sum, the crisis in the economy is both acute
and deep. We have not experienced anything similar in the history of independent
India.
3 . The origins of the problem are directly traceable to large and persistent
macro-economic imbalances and the low productivity of investment, in particularthe poor rates of return on past investments. There has been an unsustainable
increase in Government expenditure. Budgetary subsidies, with questionable social
12
and economic impact, have been allowed to grow to an alarming extent. The tax
system still has many loopholes. It lacks transparency so that it is not easy toassess the social and economic impact of various concessions built into its structure.The public sector has not been managed in a manner so as to generate large
investible surpluses. The excessive and often indiscriminate protection provided to
industry has weakened the incentive to develop a vibrant export sector. It has alsoaccentuated disparities in income and wealth. It has worked to the disadvantage ofthe rural economy. The increasing difference between the income and expenditureof the Government has led to a widening of the gap between the income and
expenditure of the economy as a whole. This is reflected in growing current account
deficits in the balance of payments.
4 . The crisis of the fiscal system is a cause for serious concern. The fiscal
deficit of the Central Government, which measures the difference between revenuereceipts and total expenditure, is estimated at more than 8 per cent of GDP in
1990-91, as compared with 6 per cent at the beginning of the 1980s and 4 per cent
in the mid-1970s. This fiscal deficit had to be met by borrowing. As a result,internal public debt of the Central Government has accumulated to about 55 percent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The burden of servicing this debt has nowbecome onerous. Interest payments alone are about 4 per cent of GDP and constitute
almost 20 per cent of the total expenditure of the Central Government. Without
decisive action now, the situation will move beyond the possibility of correctiveaction.
5 . The balance of payments situation is most difficult. The current account
deficit, which was about 2 per cent of GDP for several years, is estimated to bemore than 2.5 per cent of GDP in 1990-91. These persistent deficits, which wereinevitably financed by borrowings from abroad, have led to a continuous increasein external debt which, including non-resident Indian (NRI) deposits, is estimated
at 23 per cent of GDP at the end of 1990-91. Consequently, the debt service burden
is estimated at about 21 per cent of current account receipts in 1990-91. Thesestrains were stretched to a breaking point on account of the Gulf crisis last year.The balance of payments has lurched from one liquidity crisis to another sinceDecember 1990. The current level of foreign exchange reserves, in the range ofRs.2500 crores, would suffice to finance imports for a mere fortnight.
6 . The price situation, which is of immediate concern to the vast mass of our
people, poses a serious problem as inflation has reached a double digit level. Duringthe fiscal year ending 31st March 1991 the wholesale price index registered anincrease of 12.1 per cent, while the consumer price index registered an increase of13.6 per cent. The major worrisome feature of the inflation in 1990-91 was that itwas concentrated in essential commodities. The prices of these commodities rose
inspite of the three good monsoons in a row and hence the three successive bumper
harvests. Inflation hurts everybody, more so the poorer segments of our populationwhose incomes are not indexed.
7 . There is no time to lose. Neither the Government nor the economy can live
beyond its means year after year. The room for maneuver, to live on borrowedmoney or time, does not exist any more. Any further postponement of macro-economic adjustment, long overdue, would mean that the balance of payments
situation, now exceedingly difficult, would become unmanageable and inflation,3
already high, would exceed limits of tolerance. For improving the management of
the economy, the starting point, and indeed the centre-piece of our strategy, should
be a credible fiscal adjustment and macro-economic stabilisation during the currentfinancial year, to be followed by continued fiscal consolidation thereafter. This process
would, inevitably, need at least three years, if not longer, to complete. But therecan be no adjustment without pain. The people must be prepared to make necessary
sacrifices to preserve our economic independence and restore the health of our
economy.
8 . In the macro-management of the economy, over the medium-term, it should
be our objective to progressively reduce the fiscal deficit of the Central Government,to move towards a significant reduction of the revenue deficit, and to reduce the
current account deficit in the balance of payments. It is only such prudent
management that would enable us to curb the exponential growth in internal and
external debt and limit the burden on debt servicing, for the Government and the
country, to manageable levels. Indeed, we must make a conscious effort to reducethe internal debt of the Government and the external debt of the nation, so that we
rely more and more on our own resources to finance the process of development.
During the period of transition, it shall be our endeavour to minimise the burdenof adjustment on the poor. We are committed to adjustment with a human face. It
will also be our endeavour that the adjustment process does not adversely affect
the underlying growth impulses in our economy. We do not have time to postponeadjustment and stabilisation. We must act fast and act boldly. If we do not introduce
the needed correctives, the existing situation can only retard growth, induce recession
and fuel inflation, which would hurt the economy further and impose a far greater
burden on the poor.
9 . Macro-economic stabilisation and fiscal adjustment alone cannot suffice.
They must be supported by essential reforms in economic policy and economic
management, as an integral part of the adjustment process, reforms which would
help to eliminate waste and inefficiency and impart a new element of dynamism to
growth processes in our economy. The thrust of the reform process would be to
increase the efficiency and international competitiveness of industrial production,to utilise for this purpose foreign investment and foreign technology to a much
greater degree than we have done in the past, to increase the productivity of
investment, to ensure that India’s financial sector is rapidly modernised, and toimprove the performance of the public sector, so that the key sectors of our economy
are enabled to attain an adequate technological and competitive edge in a fast
changing global economy. I am confident that, after a successful implementation of
stabilisation measures and the essential structural and policy reforms, our economy
would return to a path of a high sustained growth with reasonable price stabilityand greater social equity.
10. Thanks to the efforts of Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, Indira Gandhi and Rajiv
Gandhi, we have developed a well diversified industrial structure. This constitutesa great asset as we begin to implement various structural reforms. However, barriers
to entry and limits on growth in the size of firms, have often led to a proliferation
of licensing and an increase in the degree of monopoly. This has put shackles on
segments of Indian industry and made them serve the interests of producers but
not pay adequate attention to the interests of consumers. There has been inadequateemphasis on reduction of costs, upgradation of technology and improvement of4
quality standards. It is essential to increase the degree of competition between
firms in the domestic market so that there are adequate incentives for raising
productivity, improving efficiency and reducing costs. In the pursuit of this objective,
we have announced important changes in industrial policy which will bring abouta significant measure of deregulation in the domestic sector, consistent with our
social objectives and the binding constraints on the balance of payments.
11. The policies for industrial development are intimately related to policies
for trade. There can be no doubt that protection was essential in the initial phase
of our industrial development, so that we could go through the learning periodwithout disruption. The past four decades have witnessed import substitution which
has not always been efficient and has some times been indiscriminate. The time
has come to expose Indian industry to competition from abroad in a phased manner.As a first step in this direction, the Government has introduced changes in import-
export policy, aimed at a reduction of import licensing, vigorous export promotion
and optimal import compression. The exchange rate adjustments on 1st and 3rd
July 1991 and the enlargement and liberalisation of the replenishment licence
system constitute the two major initial steps in the direction of trade policy reform.They represent the beginning of a transition from a regime of quantitative restrictions
to a price based mechanism.
12. After four decades of planning for industrialisation, we have now reached
a stage of development where we should welcome, rather than fear, foreign
investment. Our entrepreneurs are second to none. Our industry has come of age.Direct foreign investment would provide access to capital, technology and markets.
It would expose our industrial sector to competition from abroad in a phased
manner. Cost, efficiency, and quality would begin to receive the attention theydeserve. We have, therefore, decided to liberalise the policy regime for direct foreign
investment in the following manner. First, direct foreign investment in specified
high priority industries, with a raised limit for foreign equity at 51 per cent, would
be given prompt approval, if equity inflows are sufficient to finance the import of
capital goods at the stage of investment and if dividends are balanced by exportearnings over a period of time. Second, foreign equity upto 51 per cent would be
allowed for trading companies primarily engaged in export activities. Third, a special
board would be constituted to negotiate with a number of large international firmsand approve direct foreign investment in selected areas; this would be a special
regime to attract substantial investment that would provide access to high technology
and to world markets.
13. For the founding fathers of our Republic, a public sector that would be
vibrant, modern, competitive and capable of generating large surpluses was a vitalelement in the strategy of development. The public sector has made an important
contribution to the diversification of our industrial economy. But there have been
a number of shortcomings. In particular, the public sector has not been able togenerate internal surpluses on a large enough scale. At this critical juncture, it has
therefore become necessary to take effective measures so as to make the public
sector an engine of growth rather than an absorber of national savings without
adequate return. This has been widely accepted, but thought and action in this
regard are still far apart. To bridge this gap, the portfolio of public sector investmentswould be reviewed so as to concentrate the future operations of the public sector
in areas that are strategic for the nation, require high technology for the economy,5
and are essential for the infrastructure. In order to raise resources, encourage
wider public participation and promote greater accountability, upto 20 per cent of
government equity in selected public sector undertakings would be offered to mutual
funds and investment institutions in the public sector, as also to workers in thesefirms. Public enterprises which are chronically sick and which cannot be turnedaround, will be referred to the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction(BIFR), or to a similar high-powered body to be set up, for the formulation of revival
or rehabilitation schemes; a social security mechanism will be created to fully
protect the interests of the workers likely to be affected by the rehabilitation packagesof the BIFR. Autonomy in management, and corresponding accountability, wouldbe provided through a system of memorandums of understanding between theGovernment and public sector enterprises.
14. Our banking system and financial institutions are at the very core of the
financial infrastructure in the economy. The widening and deepening of our financialsystem have helped the spread of institutional finance over a vast area and havecontributed significantly to the augmentation of our savings rate, particularlyfinancial savings. This has been a most commendable achievement, but our financial
system has developed certain rigidities and some weaknesses which we must address
now . The objective of reform in the financial sector would be to preserve its basicrole as an essential adjunct to economic growth and competitive efficiency, whileimproving the health of its institutions. In this task, it is essential to ensure capitaladequacy, introduce prudential norms and improve profitability of our commercialbanks and financial institutions. There are no magic solutions. These are complex
issues which need careful consideration. Therefore, I propose to appoint a high
level committee to consider all relevant aspects of structure, organisation, functionsand procedures of the financial system. This committee would advise the Governmenton appropriate measures that would be needed to enhance the viability and healthof our financial sector so that it can better serve the needs of the economy without
any sacrifice of the canons and principles of a sound financial system.
15. Interest rates are a crucial dimension of the financial sector. In the formative
stages of the development of credit markets, administrative intervention in interestrates is both necessary and desirable. At the present stage of our development,however, we can begin to relax the degree of intervention and impart a greater
flexibility to the structure of interest rates. The Reserve Bank of India has already
taken an important step in this direction, by stipulating a floor rate of interest andproviding freedom to commercial banks to charge interest rates above the floorlevel based on their perceptions of risk. The Government proposes to extend asimilar freedom to term-lending financial institutions, where the minimum interestrate would be 15 per cent, and these institutions would be free to charge an
interest rate in accordance with their perception of the creditworthiness of borrowers.
With the exception of tax free bonds for the public sector, it is also proposed toremove all restrictions on interest rates for debentures, both convertible and non-convertible, floated in the capital market. The interest rate on such debt instrumentswill hereafter be governed by market forces, and the credit rating of such debtinstruments will become an integral part of the capital market process. In
consultation with the Reserve Bank of India, the Government would continue to
watch the structure of interest rates. Recently, interest rates payable on bankdeposits have been increased. I now propose to do a similar thing with regard to6
interest rates payable under the small savings schemes. Our ultimate objective is
to achieve a significant reduction both in the nominal and the real interest rates.
This would be possible if the rate of inflation is reduced significantly over the next
three years.
16. While presenting the budget for 1987-88, our former Prime Minister the
late Shri Rajiv Gandhi had assured this House that for a healthy growth of capital
markets, for protecting the rights of investors and for preventing trading malpracticesthe Government would set up a separate Board for the regulation and orderly
functioning of the Stock Exchanges and the securities industry. Although the Board
was set up, legislation to give the Board adequate powers was unfortunately not
enacted. This shall now be done forthwith and full statutory powers will be given to
the Securities and Exchange Board of India for administering the relevant provisionsof the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act and the Companies Act. Transferring
these powers from the Controller of Capital Issues and the Government to an
independent body would enable it to effectively regulate, promote and monitor theworking of the Stock Exchanges in the country. A comprehensive package of reforms
relating to trading on the Stock Exchanges, including a system of national clearing
and settlement and setting up of a central depository, is also under active
consideration.
17. In regard to Mutual Funds, some progress towards evolving a competitive
structure has been made in the last few years with encouraging results. For many
investors, mutual funds are a more suitable investment vehicle than direct ownership
of shares. The Government is already giving tax incentives for equity-linked savingsschemes offered through mutual funds. The Government has now decided to further
promote the development of mutual funds by throwing the field open to the private
sector and joint sector mutual funds. In order to safeguard the interests of the
investing public, and to encourage a healthy growth of the capital markets, a
comprehensive set of guidelines is being evolved for the operation of all mutualfunds. Consideration will also be given to enactment of legislation for this purpose.
18. A comprehensive review of policies and procedures bearing on Non-resident
Indian investments shall be carried out and further relaxations made in order to
remove all procedural difficulties and impediments to the setting up of industrial
and other ventures by Non-resident Indians. New sectors shall be made availableto NRIs for investment on a non-repatriation basis, including housing, infrastructure
and real estate development. For example, at present, NRIs of foreign nationality
are required to obtain specific permission under section 31 of the Foreign ExchangeRegulation Act (FERA) to acquire residential property. It is now proposed to provide
general exemption from this provision to such persons. However, rental income
and proceeds from the sale of such housing will be non-repatriable. For facilitating
interaction with the Central Government, to serve as a focal point for NRIs,
Government proposes to establish a Chief Commissioner for Non-resident Indians.I would urge State Governments, also, to establish an office of a Commissioner for
Non-Resident Indians.
19. I believe that the time has come to evolve a more transparent institutional
mechanism for fixing tariffs and domestic prices in sectors where there might still
be need for protecting Indian industry against foreign competition and for the
determination of administered prices, particularly in the area of public utilities. For7
this purpose, we propose to restructure the Bureau of Industrial Costs and Prices
and to transform it into a Tariff Commission.
20. As we enter the last decade of the twentieth century, India stands at the
cross-roads. The decisions we take and do not take, at this juncture, will determine
the shape of things to come for quite some time. It should come as no surprise,therefore, that an intense debate rages throughout the country as to the path weshould adopt. In a democratic society it could not be otherwise. What can we learnfrom this debate? The most important thing that comes out clearly is that wecannot realise our goal of establishing a just society, if we abandon the planningprocess. But India’s future development depends crucially on how well the planningprocess is adapted to the needs of a fast changing situation. I believe that withoutan intelligent and systematic coordinated resource use in some major sectors ofour economy, development will be lopsided. It will violate deeply cherished valuesof equity and it will keep India well below its social, intellectual and moral potential.But our planning processes must be sensitive to the needs of a dynamic economy.Over centralisation and excessive bureaucratisation of economic processes haveproved to be counter productive. We need to expand the scope and the area for theoperation of market forces. A reformed price system can be a superior instrumentof resource allocation than quantitative controls. But markets can only serve thosewho are part of the market system. A vast number of people in our country live onthe edges of a subsistence economy. We need credible programmes of directgovernment intervention focussing on the needs of these people. We have the
responsibility to provide them with quality social services such as education, health,
safe drinking water and roads. In the same way, the development of capital andtechnology intensive sectors, characterised by long gestation periods, such astransport and communications and energy will need to be planned with muchgreater care than ever before. The control of land and water degradation, whichthreatens the livelihood of millions of poor people in this country, will also requireeffective Government leadership and action.
21. The challenge that we are facing is without precedent. In its initial stages,
the Industrial Revolution in the western world concentrated on the creation ofwealth, unmindful of the social misery and inequity which characterised this process.The democratisation of the polity came much later. The socialist experiment incharting a new path for accelerated industrial transformation of an underdevelopedeconomy and polity did achieve considerable success in developing technologicaland military capabilities, accumulation of capital for rapid industrial growth andhuman resources development, in countries such as the USSR. But recentdevelopments have shown that this approach too suffered from major weaknesses,particularly in its allocative efficiency, in the management of technical change,control of environmental degradation and in harnessing the vast latent energy andtalents of individuals. In India, we launched an experiment under the leadership ofPandit Jawaharlal Nehru, an experiment which sought to unite the strengths andmerits of different approaches to accelerated development of our backward economy.We have achieved considerable success in the field of development, modernisationand greater social equity. However, we are yet far from realising our full potentialin all these areas. We have to accomplish the unfinished task, while remainingsteadfast in our allegiance to the values of a democratic system.
22. At the same time, we must restore to the creation of wealth its proper8
place in the development process. For, without it, we cannot remove the stigma of
abject poverty, ignorance and disease. But we cannot accept social misery and
inequity as unavoidable in the process of creation of wealth. The basic challenge ofour times is to ensure that wealth creation is not only tempered by equity andjustice but is harnessed to the goal of removal of poverty and development for all.
23. For the creation of wealth, we must encourage accumulation of capital.
This will inevitably mean a regime of austerity. We have also to remove the stumblingblocks from the path of those who are creating wealth. At the same time, we haveto develop a new attitude towards wealth. In the ultimate analysis, all wealth is asocial product. Those who create it and own it, have to hold it as a trust and useit in the interest of the society, and particularly of those who are under-privilegedand without means. Years ago, Gandhiji expounded the philosophy of trusteeship.This philosophy should be our guiding star. The austerity that Gandhiji practisedand preached is a necessary condition for accelerated economic development in theframework of a democratic polity. The trusteeship that he prescribed for the ownersof wealth captured the idea of social responsibility.
24. In highlighting the significance of reform, my purpose is not to give a fillip
to mindless and heartless consumerism we have borrowed from the affluent societiesof the West. My objection to the consumerist phenomenon is two-fold. First, wecannot afford it. In a society where we lack drinking water, education, health,shelter and other basic necessities, it would be tragic if our productive resourceswere to be devoted largely to the satisfaction of the needs of a small minority. Thecountry’s needs for water, for drinking and for irrigation, rural roads, good urbaninfrastructure, and massive investments in primary education and basic healthservices for the poor are so great as to effectively preclude encouragement toconsumerist behaviour imitative of advanced industrial societies. Our approach todevelopment has to combine efficiency with austerity. Austerity not in the sense ofnegation of life or a dry, arid creed that casts a baleful eye on joy and laughter. Tomy mind, austerity is a way of holding our society together in pursuit of the noblegoal of banishing poverty, hunger and disease from this ancient land of ours.
25. Let me now turn to fiscal adjustment during the current financial year.
The beginning of any attempt to correct the fiscal imbalance in the economy mustbe directed at a reduction in expenditure and an increase in income of theGovernment, so as to reduce the fiscal deficit. In the medium-term, however, ourfiscal regime would be sustainable only if revenue receipts not only meet revenueexpenditure but also provide a sufficient surplus to finance capital expenditurethat does not yield direct economic returns as such, as in defence or in socialsectors. Even this would not suffice if investment expenditures in the budget donot earn an adequate return. The elimination of structural imbalances in our fiscalsystem would require a reduction both in the fiscal deficit and in the revenuedeficit as a proportion of GDP. The Union Budget for 1991-92 is an essential first
step in this direction.
26. It must be recognised that the necessary reduction in the fiscal deficit,
during 1991-92, is a stupendous task. The interim budget presented to Parliament
in March 1991 estimated the fiscal deficit at Rs.38475 crores. But this estimate
was based on assumptions about certain decisions that have not been implemented.The postponement of the regular budget has made a formidable task even moredifficult because almost four months of the financial year have now elapsed without9
any effort at fiscal correction. Indeed, past trends in revenue and expenditure
suggest that, without any corrective action on our part, the fiscal deficit during
1991-92 could well reach a level of more than Rs.52000 crores. The differencebetween the two sets of figures provides the real measure of the fiscal correctionneeded during the current financial year.
27. According to provisional data available, the more narrowly defined budget
deficit, as measured by borrowing through short term Treasury bills, for 1990-91
at Rs.11430 crores was significantly higher than the revised estimate of Rs.10722
crores, largely due to a substantial revenue shortfall, particularly in corporationtax revenues. This highlights the handicap with which we begin. Let me now present
the scenario for 1991-92.
28. The increasing levels of non-plan expenditure, financed through borrowing,
have led to an exponential increase in interest payments by the Government. The
revised estimates for interest payments during 1990-91, at Rs.21850 crores,accounted for as much as 38 per cent of the net revenue receipts of the Central
Government. Interest payments during 1991-92, estimated at Rs.27450 crores,
constitute 42 per cent of the net revenue receipts of the Central Government atexisting rates of taxation. If the present trends continue without any correction,
then interest payments could well account for more than 50 per cent of the net
revenue receipts of the Central Government by 1994-95. These magnitudes andproportions only serve to highlight the gravity of the situation and the acute need
for a substantial adjustment in non-plan expenditure over the next three years.
29. The revised estimate for total non-plan expenditure in 1990-91 was
Rs.76761 crores. In the normal course, even with the strictest scrutiny but in the
absence of specific measures for reducing expenditure, this non-plan expenditure
would have increased to a level of Rs.89000 crores in 1991-92. Any attempt at
fiscal correction during the current financial year can be meaningful only if non-
plan expenditure is reduced by at least 10 per cent from the level it would otherwisereach.
30. The single largest component of non-plan expenditure is interest payments.
Even if there is a drastic reduction in Government borrowing during this year,interest payments would still be in the range of Rs.35000 crores in the next financial
year. The exponential increase in interest payments can be brought under some
measure of control, by 1994-95, only through a strict discipline on governmentborrowing for a period of three years.
31. The second largest component of non-plan expenditure is the allocation
for the defence sector, where the provision in the revised estimates for 1990-91 was
Rs.15750 crores. No attempt at containing non-plan expenditure can succeed if
defence is to be excluded. At the same time, it is absolutely essential to ensure thata quest for economy in expenditure does not in any way compromise national
security. We must, therefore, seek to limit expenditure without diluting the efficiency
and effectiveness of our defence services. Keeping in view all these considerations,it has been decided to provide an outlay of Rs.16350 crores for defence in the
current year.
32. Honourable Members are aware that export subsidies have been abolished
with effect from 3 July 1991. The export sector is being adequately compensated
through the adjustments in the exchange rate and the expansion of theReplenishment Licensing System which were implemented at the beginning of July.10
Consequently, it is now necessary to provide only Rs.1224 crores for export subsidies
in the budget estimates for 1991-92, as compared with the earlier estimated
requirement of Rs.4200 crores, yielding a saving of as much as Rs.3000 crores
during the remainder of this year.
33. In so far as fertiliser subsidies are concerned, with effect from this evening,
low analysis fertilisers such as calcium ammonium nitrate, ammonium chloride,
ammonium sulphate and sulphate of potash will be free from price and movement
controls. There will be an increase of 40 per cent, on an average, in the price of allother fertilisers. In addition, in respect of single super phosphate, there shall also
be a ceiling on the subsidy per tonne payable to producers so as to move towards
total deregulation in the next few years; this should act as an incentive for all highcost units to reduce costs and improve efficiency. The necessary notifications in
this regard are being issued separately, today, by the Ministry of Agriculture.
34. The economic rationale for an increase in the price of fertilisers is so
obvious that it does not need to be stated. Nevertheless, I would like to draw the
attention of the House to the fact that there has been no increase in fertiliser pricessince July 1981. In these ten years, there has been a continuous increase in the
procurement prices of paddy and wheat, as also in the market prices of other
crops, received by the agricultural sector. Farmers will be compensated for theproposed increase in the price of fertilisers through suitable increases in procurement
prices.
35. We would continue to ensure that 50 per cent of the plan resources are
invested in the agricultural and rural sector. The provision for the continuing schemes
for assistance to small and marginal farmers for dug wells and shallow tubewellswould be doubled. The ceilings on assistance in difficult areas, where the water-
table is very low, would be removed. Similarly, the provision for assistance for fresh
water and brackish water aqua-culture and for oilseeds and pulses productionwould be substantially stepped up. New schemes are being drawn up to popularise
small tractors and matching implements, drip and sprinkler irrigation in areas
where water is scarce, and quality seeds in low yield areas. Another new schemethat would be implemented from this kharif season is for providing assistance to
State Governments, cooperative societies, and farmers’ groups to provide blanket
plant protection cover on payment of a small fee in large identified areas undercotton or pulses. It would also be possible to demonstrate the advantages of
integrated pest management in these areas. In order to safeguard any possible loss
in production because of increase in fertiliser prices, and any decline in consumption,the credit structure would be strengthened to ensure adequate availability of credit
particularly to the small and marginal farmers. Simultaneously, soil testing
laboratories and farm advisory services all over the country would be strengthenedto ensure efficient use of fertilisers and popularise the use of bio-fertilisers. We
would also identify a few irrigation projects that can be completed in this very year
and ensure that these are provided the necessary funds. The other new initiatives,
also, would not be starved of funds. As far as possible our emphasis will be on
provision of quality services to our farmers and not on hand outs and subsidies.
36. The sugar subsidy which is costing the exchequer about Rs.350 crores
per annum is indeed an aberration, which crept into the system from January
1990, when the increase in the levy price paid to producers was not matched by a
simultaneous increase in the issue price for consumers in the public distribution
system. Small quantities of sugar are made available, mostly in metropolitan and11
urban areas, under the public distribution system at Rs.5.25 per kg. whereas the
price that most people pay in the market is around Rs.10 per kg. Government hasdecided that this subsidy should be abolished forthwith. Consequently, the issueprice of sugar under the public distribution system will be increased by 85 paise
per kg. to Rs.6.10 per kg. with effect from this evening. At the same time, the
public distribution system is being strengthened to serve more effectively the weakersections of our population, particularly the rural poor, having special regard totheir basic needs for foodgrains such as rice and wheat. The provision for foodsubsidies in the current year is being stepped up to Rs.2600 crores, as compared
with only Rs.1800 crores provided in the interim budget and Rs.2450 crores provided
in the revised estimates for 1990-91.
37. As a result of the exchange rate adjustments, at the beginning of July
1991, there would be an increase in the rupee value of the import bill for crude oil
and petroleum products. It is, therefore, necessary to raise the prices of petroleum
products for domestic consumers. This would also help to restrain the growth in
consumption of petroleum products. The price of motor spirit, domestic LPG and
aviation turbine fuel for domestic use would be raised by 20 per cent. The prices of
other petroleum products, excluding diesel and kerosene for non-industrial
use,would be raised by 10 per cent. The price of kerosene, for non-industrial use,would be reduced by 10 per cent which means a 50 per cent roll-back in relation
to the increase in the price that came into effect on 15 October 1990. Even in a
most difficult financial situation, this is being done to protect the poor for whom
kerosene is an essential source of light and fuel. While there will be no increase in
the price of diesel, I would endeavour to protect the interests of the farmers who
use diesel. For this purpose, I shall hold discussions with State Governments. The
proposed increases in the prices of petroleum products will come into effect from
this evening, and the necessary notification in this regard is being separately issued
by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas.
38. For non-plan expenditure, excluding interest payments, defence, and major
subsidies, the total provision in the budget estimates for 1991-92 is Rs. 28,073
crores, reflecting a reduction of Rs. 1538 crores compared with the provision in the
revised estimates for 1990-91. If we take into account the fact that no separateprovision has been made for the payment of additional installments of dearness
allowance by Ministries and Departments in the current year, the total reduction in
such other non-plan expenditure will exceed Rs. 2000 crores. In recent years, it
has been the usual practice to issue instructions to Ministries that such additional
requirements should be accommodated within the approved budget estimates. Thishas invariably resulted in some programmes on the plan side being deprived of
adequate resources. It is my intention to effect maximum possible economies in the
non-plan administrative expenditure. Therefore, all Ministries have been requestedto prioritise their activities so that those which figure at the bottom of the list can
be abridged, while those which have outlived their utility can be abandoned
altogether. This exercise has already been initiated by all Ministries and is expected
to be completed by the end of August 1991. With this approach, the proposed
reduction in other non-plan expenditure, which I am promising to the House,would be brought about in a more meaningful manner without leading to a reduction
in the provision for plan programmes.
39. There is one large component of non-plan expenditure that is a burden on12
the exchequer. I refer to the Government’s obligation under the Rural Debt Relief
Scheme. Unfortunately, there was a gross under-estimation of the total fiscal liabilityunder this scheme which was introduced last year. In addition to the sum of Rs.1500 crores provided in the revised estimates for last year, we have to provide Rs.
1500 crores in the current year. But this is not all. We may need a similar provision
in the next year.
40. As a result of the major adjustments in the sphere of expenditure, which
I have outlined in my speech, the budget estimate for total non-plan expenditure in
1991-92 stands at Rs. 79,697 crores. It is simply not possible to reduce interest
payments in the short term. The provision for non-plan expenditure, excluding
interest payments, in the current year represents a reduction of 4.9 per cent
compared with the provisions in the revised estimates for 1990-91, and a reduction
of almost 15 per cent in relation to what we would have had to provide this year,but for the specific correctives that are being introduced. We have, thus, more than
fulfilled our commitment to reduce non-plan expenditure by 10 per cent, which
was stated in our Party’s election manifesto.
41. The election manifesto of the Congress Party identifies areas for special
emphasis in our strategy of development. These include a substantial augmentation
of employment programmes, the construction of dwelling units for the weakersections of our society, an expansion of the programme for irrigation wells and soon. This would need a change in, and some reorientation of, plan priorities, with ashift towards investment in rural areas and expenditure on programmes designed
for the benefit of the poor. Our strategy would, of course, be reflected in the Eighth
Five Year Plan, which would now commence on 1 April 1992. It shall be ourendeavour to finalise the Eighth Plan document by the end of this calendar year, sothat the annual plans for 1992-93, as well as the budgets of the Centre and the
States for that year, reflect the changed priorities.
42. As the Vote on Account had earlier been taken only to cover the expenditure
in the first four months, this budget has had to be presented before the end of
July, 1991. We have, thus, not had the time to re-orient the Annual Plan for 1991-
92 to reflect fully our various concerns. Moreover, this year’s annual plan has hadto be situated in the context of the massive fiscal correction that we have to putthrough. In fact, it was first felt that it would be necessary to effect a substantialreduction in budget support for the Central Plan and Central Plan assistance for
the States. I am, however, happy to inform the House that with the substantial
cuts proposed in non-plan expenditure, it is now possible to protect the flow ofCentral Plan assistance to States and Union Territories at the level of Rs. 14710crores, as reflected in the interim budget for 1991-92. The Central plan outlaywould, however, show a modest increase at Rs. 42969 crores with a budget support
of Rs. 19015 crores.
43. I am aware that in basic infrastructure areas such as power, coal,
communications and petroleum, we will have to set our sights much higher. In thepresent situation, characterised by an acute shortage of foreign exchange, it is, inparticular, imperative to augment substantially the domestic production of coal,
crude oil, natural gas and electrical energy. Efforts will also have to be made on a
crash basis for promoting utmost economy in use of energy through more efficienttechnologies in industry, agriculture, transport and domestic sectors. The13
transmission and distribution line losses would also have to be brought down
drastically from the present high level of 22 per cent. We shall address ourselves to
all these tasks once we are through with taking stock of the situation. It is myearnest hope that, by then, thanks to the fiscal corrections now being put through,the resources position would improve, giving us the necessary flexibility. For thepresent, it has been my endeavour to maintain essential investment throughappropriate support for the Central Plan despite binding constraints on theexchequer.
44. In preparing this budget, I have sought to ensure that the burden of fiscal
adjustment does not fall on State Governments. It is my belief that the CentralGovernment must set an example by introducing fiscal correctives, and it is my
hope that the State Governments would move in this direction as soon as possible.
In particular, I would urge them to ensure prompt payment of dues owed by theState Electricity Boards to the National Thermal Power Corporation, Coal India andthe Indian Railways. We cannot allow State level enterprises to become an instrumentof unplanned and unauthorised transfer of resources from the Centre to the States.That is neither fair nor equitable. This practice must, therefore, stop forthwith.Simultaneously, State Governments must take effective steps to improve their fiscalperformance and streamline the working of their public enterprises. They shouldnot expect me to reward fiscal laxity by permitting them to have recourse tounauthorised overdrafts from the Reserve Bank of India. I want them to be anactive partner in the accomplishment of the difficult task of restoring the fiscalhealth of the country.
45. The process of macro-economic adjustment, which is being initiated with
this budget, would take at least three years to complete. This adjustment musthave a human face. Therefore, during the period of transition, we shall do everythingthat is possible to minimise the burden of adjustment on the poor. To some extent,the poor would be protected as the rate of inflation comes down. We shall makedetermined efforts to control inflation and the price rise. The fiscal strategy of thisbudget will make a major contribution in this regard. In addition, it will be ourendeavour to provide protection to the poor in the form of enhanced outlays in thesocial sectors. Employment creation and poverty eradication in rural India willcontinue to receive the highest priority. At the same time, Government is committedto the uplift of the weakest and the most vulnerable sections of our society.
46. The plan outlay for the Ministry of Rural Development is being stepped up
from Rs.3115 crores last year to Rs. 3508 crores this year. Within this, the outlayfor employment programmes alone is Rs.2100 crores. The various employmentoriented programmes should make it possible to provide nearly 900 million man-days of employment. If, this year, we are not aiming at the target of 1000 millionman-days mentioned in our manifesto it is because the season when there ismaximum need for such employment is already over. The Eighth Plan now underformulation will spell out a comprehensive strategy and programmes to achieve thelong term employment objectives, and targets such as those relating to theconstruction of irrigation wells, urban night shelters and Sulabh Shauchalayas,dwelling units for poor backward classes, scheduled castes and scheduled tribes inthe villages, mentioned in our Party’s election manifesto.
47. The provision for the rural water supply scheme is being stepped up to
Rs.758 crores, so as to make it possible to set aside Rs. 250 crores for ensuring14
complete coverage of ‘no-source problem villages’ by the end of 1992-93. The earlier
expectation was that these villages would be covered only by the end of the EighthPlan period. The late Shri Rajiv Gandhi had attached great priority to this programmeand had set up a Technology Mission for this purpose. The programme, which isnow being named after Shri Rajiv Gandhi, will be accelerated. We will ensure thatresource constraints do not stand in the way of achieving the target.
48. It is a matter of deep concern that we have still not been able to put an
end to the dehumanising practice of manual removal of night-soil. The allocationfor this programme has in the past been less than adequate. It has now beendecided not only to accelerate the programme for the conversion of dry-latrinesbut also to step up the allocation for the rehabilitation and retraining of scavengers.
Towards this end, the allocation for the programme has been increased by Rs. 25
crores and more funds, to the extent necessary, would be provided during thecourse of the year. Inclusive of the increased provision for this programme, thetotal outlay for the programmes of the Ministry of Welfare, which is concernedwith the welfare of scheduled castes, scheduled tribes and other weaker sections
of our society, is being stepped up from Rs. 364 crores in 1990-91 to Rs. 479
crores in 1991-92. The outlay for the Department of Women and ChildDevelopment, dealing with perhaps the two most disadvantaged segments of ourpopulation among the poor, is being enhanced from Rs. 330 crores last year toRs. 400 crores this year. For Health and Family Welfare, I am providing a plan
outlay of Rs. 1051 crores in 1991-92 as compared with Rs. 950 crores in 1990-
91.
49. The allocation of resources for investment in social sectors is of utmost
importance for the development of human resources. In this context, there is noneed for me to emphasise the importance of education, in particular, elementaryeducation. Our efforts to restructure and revitalise the economy can succeed onlyif we invest in our people. Particular attention has to be paid to the provision ofquality education to children belonging to the scheduled castes, the scheduledtribes and other economically and socially backward classes. Children who belongto the category of first generation learners need special care and attention. If theequality of opportunity is to acquire its true significance, quality education mustnot remain the exclusive privilege of the children of the rich. The Government is
committed to ensure that, whatever be our constraints, the programmes of education
will not be allowed to suffer for want of financial support. Every effort will be madeto ensure that the constitutional directive of providing free and compulsory educationupto the age of 14 years becomes a reality before we enter the twenty first century.In the sphere of higher education and technical education, more resources areneeded for modernisation and diversification, but, at the same time, an effort mustbe made to secure optimum results from the existing investments in theseinstitutions. The requirements of education are vast and we shall have to seekinnovative ways of finding resources. Budget support provided by the CentralGovernment and the State Governments are an important source, but cannotcontinue to remain the only source. I am raising the allocation for education fromRs.865 crores in 1990-91 to Rs.977 crores in 1991-92. This allocation is notcommensurate with my deep commitment to education and the priority that isattached by the Government to the education sector. I would have liked to do morebut we must learn to live with the constraints on the exchequer.15
50. We have the third largest number of scientists and technologists in the
world. Yet, technology development in our country has not been commensurateeither with this number or the investments that we have been making in the
science and technology sectors in our successive Five Year Plans. This gap would
have to be bridged through a suitable reorientation of the Science and TechnologyPolicy and the way paved for relating science and technology more intimately to therequirements of our development, as well as for better upgradation, absorption,adaptation and assimilation of new technologies. This task has become imperativeas we prepare ourselves to be an internationally competitive economy.
51. Government has also decided on five new initiatives. The first of these is
the establishment of a Corporation for the welfare of the backward classes, a task
that the Congress manifesto has included for completion within the first 100 days.
The details of the structure and duties of this Corporation are being finalised bythe Ministry of Welfare and will be announced before the end of this session.
52. Government will establish a National Renewal Fund, with a substantial
corpus. The main objective of this fund will be to ensure that the cost of technical
change and modernisation of the productive apparatus does not devolve on theworkers. This fund will provide a social safety net which will protect the workersfrom the adverse consequences of the technological transformation. I visualise thatthis fund will grow in size and State governments will also contribute to its corpus
in due course. The fund will not merely provide ameliorative measures for the
workers affected in the course of technical change but, more importantly, provideretraining to them, so that they are in a position to remain active productive partnersin the process of modernisation.
53. The third programme relates to the care of children of families affected by
communal riots. These riots are a blot on the fair name of our Republic. OurGovernment is deeply committed to the protection and advancement of all religiousand cultural minorities. Effective steps will be taken to prevent recurrence ofcommunal violence. At present there are arrangements to provide compensation ofvarying amounts to the riot affected families. But experience shows that suchcompensation does not always protect the interests of children of the riot affectedfamilies. These children then grow up into disgruntled and disorganised adulthood.They become an easy prey to the propaganda of anti-social elements and theobscurantist, fundamentalist forces of reaction. To protect the interests of suchchildren, look after their welfare and in particular their education, the Governmentproposes to set up a National Foundation for Communal Harmony as an autonomousnon- government organisation. The Central Government will make a significantcontribution to this Foundation in 1991-92. I invite State Governments as well asindustry and trade to make liberal contributions for this noble cause.
54. The fourth programme is to promote national integration through a scheme
for enabling the youth of each part of the country to go in large numbers and workfor short periods in other parts of the country, giving them an opportunity tomingle with people of different regions and languages. A similar step in this directionhas already been taken in the Navodaya Vidyalaya Programme. This will now bestrengthened and extended on a national basis.
55. The fifth programme relates to promotion of South-South cooperation. We16
as a nation are committed to close cooperation and sharing our development
experience, knowledge and expertise with non-aligned and other developing countries.There is immense scope for Indian scientists, technicians, engineers, teachers,social workers and farmers to contribute to the development process in the thirdworld. Our experience in various fields can be of great relevance and assistance tomany developing countries particularly in Asia and Africa. It is our hope to arrangefor participation of at least 500 volunteers in different nation building tasks, inselected developing countries, in the coming year. The details of the programmeswill be worked out and announced before the end of the session.
56. The House will also be pleased to learn that in acceptance of a
recommendation of the South Commission presided over by Dr. Julius K. Nyerere,
the former President of Tanzania, we propose to set up a National Committee underthe chairmanship of the Prime Minister for mobilising public opinion in support ofSouth-South cooperation and for advising our Government for devising concreteaction programmes in this regard. This committee will consist of representatives of
Government, trade and industry, trade unions and members of learned professions.
57. The Rajiv Gandhi Foundation has been established to perpetuate the
memory of the great leader and to promote the ideals and objectives for which helived and laid down his life. This Foundation, among other things, will lay particularemphasis on research and action programmes relating to the application of science
and technology for development, propagation of literacy, the protection of the
environment, the promotion of communal harmony and national integration, theuplift of the under-privileged, women and handicapped persons, administrativereforms and India’s role in the global economy. As a homage to the late Shri RajivGandhi and in support of the laudable objectives of the Foundation, Government
has decided to contribute Rs.100 crores to the Foundation at the rate of Rs.20
crores per annum for a period of five years beginning from the current year.
58. Pending determination of the exact amounts that will be necessary for
each of these new initiatives, a lump sum provision of Rs.250 crores has beenincluded in the plan outlay of the Ministry of Finance.
59. The budget provision for total expenditure in 1991-92 is Rs.113422 crores,
of which Rs.79697 crores is non-plan expenditure and Rs.33725 crores is planexpenditure.
60. In the sphere of revenue receipts, at the existing rates of taxation, gross
tax revenues are estimated at Rs.66218 crores during the current financial year,compared to Rs.58916 crores in the revised estimates of last year. The payment to
States of their share of taxes is placed at Rs.15643 crores in 1991-92 as against
Rs.14535 crores in the revised estimates for 1990-91. Thus, the net revenue receiptsof the Centre, including non-tax revenue, are estimated to increase from Rs.57381crores in 1990-91 to Rs.65524 crores in 1991-92.
61. In the sphere of capital receipts, market borrowings are placed at Rs.7500
crores this year, which is lower than Rs.8000 crores last year; this is part of a
conscious effort to reduce the borrowing of the Central Government which would,
in keeping with the past trends, have gone up by about 10 per cent. The netcollections on account of small savings are estimated at Rs.8000 crores, which areat the same level as the revised estimates for last year. In addition, the Government17
has decided to disinvest upto 20 per cent of its equity in selected public sector
undertakings in favour of mutual funds and investment institutions in the publicsector, which is expected to yield Rs.2500 crores to the exchequer during thecurrent financial year. This disinvestment would broad-base the equity, improvethe management and enhance the availability of resources in these enterprises.
62. The net receipts on account of external assistance, excluding grants, are
placed at Rs.3510 crores compared to Rs.3984 crores in the revised estimates of
1990-91. While the increase in the loan repayment and interest payment liabilities,
as a consequence of the recent exchange rate adjustments, is fully reflected in thebudget estimates, the likely increase in the rupee value of external assistance
following the exchange rate adjustments is still under assessment. To the extent
that these receipts increase, there will also be a corresponding increase in
expenditure when the assistance is passed on to the concerned projects or schemes
for which such assistance is received. These changes, which will thus be budget
deficit neutral, will be incorporated at the stage of revised estimates.
63. Taking into account other changes in receipts and expenditure, total
receipts at the existing rates of taxation are estimated at Rs.103698 crores, while
total expenditure is estimated at Rs.113422 crores. Therefore, without additional
resource mobilisation, the budget deficit is estimated at Rs.9724 crores, the revenue
deficit at Rs.15859 crores, and the fiscal deficit at Rs.39732 crores.
PART B
64. Honourable Members would have observed that expenditure adjustment
constitutes the core of the proposed fiscal correction during the current financial
year. But the process of fiscal adjustment cannot be complete without revenue
measures to increase the income of the Government. I now seek the indulgence of
the House to present the reliefs, the incentives and the levies in the sphere of direct
taxes.
65. The revenue from direct taxes, both as a proportion of GDP and as a
percentage of total tax revenues, has registered a steady decline over time. This
trend has to be reversed, so as to restore equity in, and balance to our fiscal
system. Resources for development must be raised from those who have the capacity
to pay. For this purpose, we must place greater emphasis on direct taxes. This calls
for increased rates wherever necessary and a better tax compliance. At the sametime, rationalisation of the system, which reduces the maximum marginal rate of
tax, simplifies the procedures, reduces the plethora of concessions, and brings the
average rates of income tax at various levels of income to more appropriate levels,
is necessary. The time available before presenting the budget was simply not enough
to formulate basic structural changes. Yet, I have made a conscious effort to moveone step forward in this direction.
66. Nobody can deny the existence of large scale tax evasion, both in terms of
income and in terms of wealth. Unless I find substantial improvement in tax
compliance in the next few months, Government will have no choice but to take
strong measures to make the tax evader pay a sufficiently high price for suchdelinquency. Before coming down heavily on tax evaders, I would like to give them18
a last opportunity to come clean. The black money so mobilised will be utilised for
the achievement of social objectives such as slum clearance and low cost housing
for the rural poor.
67. I propose to institute a scheme, under which any person would be allowed
to make a deposit with the National Housing Bank on or before close of business
on 30th November, 1991. Thereupon, forty per cent of such deposit would be
deducted and set apart as a special levy, which would form the corpus of a fund in
the National Housing Bank. This fund will be utilised for financing slum clearance
and low cost housing for the poor, in accordance with guidelines and priorities laid
down by the Government. The depositor would be allowed to draw the balanceamount in one or more installments through account payee cheques for any stated
purpose of his choice. There will be no lock-in period for this deposit. Persons
making such deposits will not be required to disclose the source of funds from
which the deposits are made. In other words, the monies deposited would be provided
complete immunity from enquiry and investigation. The provisions of Direct TaxLaws would, however, apply to the net deposits after deduction of the special levy,
from the date of the deposit. The levy itself would not be an allowable deduction in
the computation of income of the person concerned. Necessary legislation in this
regard will be introduced shortly, in this session of Parliament. The details of the
scheme and its date of commencement will also be announced soon.
68. The Income-tax Act contains a provision under which tax payers can avail
of the facility of waiver of penalty and interest on the amount disclosed once in a
life-time. To those who have already availed of this facility, I propose to give just
one more opportunity to disclose their unaccounted incomes. The Finance Bill
contains a proposal for making suitable amendments to section 273A of the Income-tax Act for this purpose.
69. The Settlement Commission was set up to provide an opportunity to
assessees to declare their undisclosed income and wealth. Under the existing
procedures, the Commissioner of Income Tax can, on certain grounds, object to
admission of an application by the Settlement Commission. This results inunnecessary delay. This provision is, therefore, being deleted. The Settlement
Commission will, however, continue to call for and take into account the
Commissioner’s report, provided it is furnished within a period of six months.
70. Our election manifesto has promised that we will promote reinvestment of
profits, by suitable tax exemptions, in areas where there is crying need for massiveinvestment such as low and middle income group housing, highways, roads and
bridges, non-conventional energy, school buildings and supply of drinking water. I,
therefore, propose to make a provision in the Income-tax Act to provide deduction,
in computing taxable profits of a taxpayer carrying on a business or profession, of
the entire amount paid for financing projects or schemes promoting social and
economic welfare. To ensure optimum use of scarce resources, I propose to set up
a National Committee of eminent persons to identify areas requiring support andfor recommending specific projects and schemes. A similar deduction will be allowed
also in the case of taxpayers not carrying on any business or profession.
71. As a token of my commitment to education and research and in recognition
of the significant role they have to play in our development process, I propose to19
extend certain tax concessions that will help in the funding of social science research
and provide some incentive to authors and publishers.
72. At present, only taxpayers carrying on a business or profession get
deduction for sums paid to any approved university, college or other institutionsfor research in social sciences related to the class of business carried on by them.I consider that there is a case for providing more tax incentives for social scienceresearch. I, therefore, propose to allow the same100 per cent deduction in respect
of sums paid for research in these areas whether related to business or not. I also
propose to allow this deduction to taxpayers not carrying on any business orprofession.
73. The role of books, particularly in the context of our National Literacy
Mission as well as the National Education Policy cannot be overemphasized. Toencourage publication of better and less expensive books and to give a fillip to thepublishing industry, I propose to revive, with effect from the current accountingperiod, the deduction of twenty per cent of profits from publication of books for aperiod of 5 years. To encourage the publication of quality text books in variousIndian languages I also propose to revive the 25 per cent deduction from professionalincome of authors of text books in Indian languages. This will also be available fora period of five years, beginning with the current income-earning period.
74. Offshore country funds are emerging as important channels for attracting
foreign institutional investment particularly from non resident Indians. India madea beginning in this direction in 1989. Of late, however, there are signs of diminishinginterest of foreign institutional investors in off-shore India country funds. Thecomparative national tax structure is one of the key factors affecting the directionof international financial flow. I, therefore, propose to substantially reduce the rateof tax on dividend income received by the off-shore funds from the units of UTI orother mutual funds and on long-term capital gains from such units. On dividendincome the proposed rate of tax will be 10 percent as against the existing rate of 25percent. On long-term capital gains, I propose to have the same rate of 10 percentas against the effective rate of about 45 percent at present.
75. In the light of our deep emotional involvement with the struggle of the
Black majority in South Africa and as a further affirmation of our commitment to
South-South cooperation, I propose that donations to the AFRICA FUND be entitled
to 100 per cent deduction under section 80G of the Income-tax Act.
76. The Government is committed to the welfare of our unfortunate
handicapped citizens. In an effort to mitigate in some small measure their hardship,
I propose to increase the deduction available under Section 80 U of the Income-tax
Act in respect of totally blind or physically handicapped persons, from fifteen
thousand rupees to twenty thousand rupees. The benefit of this tax concession isalso proposed to be extended to partially blind persons.
77. Promotion of housing activity ranks high in Government’s socioeconomic
priorities. Towards this objective, I propose to extend the benefit of tax rebate
under section 88 of the Income-tax Act also to contractual schemes floated by
public housing corporations like HUDCO and State Housing Boards along the linesof the Home Loan Account Scheme of the National Housing Bank. Further, the tax
rebate under section 88 will also be available in relation to installment/repayment20
of loans towards cost of land and also in cases where the house was purchased or
constructed before 1st April, 1987.
78. Our software industry has made considerable progress in recent years.
However, there is still a vast unexploited potential for growth. It is time we makeall-out efforts to capture the overseas software market. With this objective, I propose
to extend the tax concession under section 80HHC of the Income-tax Act to export
of software. With this concession, the exports of this industry should register rapid
growth.
79. I also propose to extend the concession under section 80HHC to the export
of processed minerals.
80. I consider that scientific, technical and professional skills, knowledge and
experience possessed by our professionals in various fields like architecture,
accounting etc. have an increasing capacity to earn foreign exchange for the country.
Many of them carry on their professions as individuals or partnership firms. Toenable them to benefit from the tax concession available under section 80-O, I
propose to extend, to the non-corporate assessees, the concession presently available
only to the corporate sector.
81. In order to encourage development of tourist infrastructure in regions
where such facilities are almost non-existent today, I propose to exempt fromExpenditure Tax for a period of ten years expenditure incurred in new approvedhotels set up in hilly and other remote areas. I also propose to allow to such hotelsa deduction of 50 per cent from their profits instead of the normal 30 per cent
under section 80-I, subject to certain conditions.
82. As a token of my appreciation of the role of a healthy capital market in the
development of our economy, I propose to raise the basic deduction of Rs 10,000now available under section 48 of the Income-tax Act in respect of long-term capitalgains to Rs 15,000.
83. As indicated earlier, I wish to take some positive steps to reverse the trend
of decline in the proportion of direct tax revenues to total revenues. I therefore
propose to raise additional resources this year through a greater reliance on directtaxes. I now turn to my proposals for ensuring better tax compliance and moblisingrevenues through the imposition of additional taxes.
84. To enable the Government to identify income earners, most of whom would
not otherwise declare their income or would not declare their full income, I proposeto extend the scheme of tax deduction at source to cover new areas of payments inthe nature of commissions, interest paid by banks on time deposits and withdrawalsfrom the National Savings Scheme. To minimise the inconvenience for small
depositors, tax will be deducted at source only in respect of payments in excess of
Rs.2500 per year. Those receiving payments in excess of the limit but not havingtaxable income will have the facility of collecting payment with no tax deduction byfiling a declaration in the prescribed manner.
85. The present provision for offsetting short-term capital losses against income
leads to tax avoidance. I, therefore, propose that any loss on transfer of a capital
asset will be set off only against gain from transfer of another capital asset. This is21
only logical. It should also stop the practice of buying short-term capital losses
being resorted to by some unscrupulous tax payers.
86. Over the years, those with an instinct for gambling have increasingly
patronised the races. I propose to withdraw the income-tax exemption of Rs.5000in respect of earnings from races, including horse races. I am sure that personswho place bets will now also have the added pleasure of sharing their earningsfrom races with the Government.
87. Professor Kaldor once observed that no civilised society should have a
maximum marginal rate of income tax higher than 45 per cent. We are firmly
committed to a tax system which is simple, credible, yet progressive, in whichpeople realise that honesty is the best policy. I expect to make a beginning in thisdirection as soon as we can overcome the present fiscal difficulties. I am confidentthat this process can be completed before the end of the five year term of ourGovernment. Tax payers can help to accelerate the process of tax reform if all ofthem resolve to pay their income-tax dues fully and promptly. In the midst of afiscal crisis however, such a change is not feasible. We must wait for better times.The best I can do under the circumstances, is what I propose to do this year : keepthe personal income-tax rate structure including the surcharge unchanged. That Ihave not added to the burden of the taxpayer is, in itself, a relief.
88. I have received several representations that wealth-tax rates need to be
rationalised. I see considerable merit in these representations. However, taking into
account the needs of revenue and also for want of time, I propose to make no
change in the rates of wealth-tax.
89. For the purposes of levy of wealth-tax, the rules of valuation of assets aim
at capturing their market value, or near about, as on the valuation date. I find thata distortion has crept into these rules. When an individual holds any asset in hisname its valuation is at the market value. However, if a group of persons holds itsassets through an investment company the taxable value of these assets gets reducedconsiderably because it is based on the book value and not on the market value. I,therefore, propose to remove this anomaly by providing that in valuing unquotedshares of an investment company, the break-up value of the share will be determinedafter revaluing the assets of the company at their market value.
90. I feel disappointed that the phenomenal growth in the output, value added
and profits of the corporate sector, in recent years, has not been appropriatelyreflected in corporate tax collections. The experience of the preceding financialyear, in particular, is a matter of serious concern. I am, therefore, raising thecorporate tax rate for widely held companies, from 40 to 45 per cent. A correspondingincrease of 5 percentage points from 45 to 50 per cent is being made in the corporatetax rate for closely held companies. I also propose to continue the existing surchargeof 15 per cent.
91. The traditional distinction in corporate tax rates between trading companies
and industrial companies has outlived its utility. I therefore propose to remove thisdistinction.
92. I recognise that in the medium term the rates and structure of corporate
taxation have to be consistent with the needs of an economy aiming to becomeinternationally competitive. I shall attend to this task as soon as we have overcomethe present fiscal crisis.1
Budget 1992-93
Speech of
Shri Manmohan Singh
Minister of Finance
29th February, 1992
PART A
Sir,
I rise to present the budget for 1992-93.2 . The fiscal year now drawing to a close has been a difficult one by any
standards. It has been a year of crisis and of crisis management. It has also beena year of great economic challenges and bold new initiatives.
3 . Honourable Members would recall that when the new Government assumed
office eight months ago, we inherited an economy on the verge of collapse. Inflation
was accelerating rapidly. The balance of payments was in serious trouble. The
foreign exchange reserves were barely enough for two weeks of imports. Foreigncommercial banks had stopped lending to India. Non-Resident Indians werewithdrawing their deposits. Shortages of foreign exchange had forced a massiveimport squeeze, which had halted the rapid industrial growth of earlier years andhad produced negative growth rates from May 1991 onwards.
4 . This is the grim legacy we inherited.
5 . Our first and immediate challenge was to arrest the slide and restore
India’s credibility both domestically and in the eyes of the world. To achieve thisobjective we had to take immediate measures to avert a default in internationalpayments and also take steps to restore macro-economic balance in the economyin the short run, with a view to controlling inflation and reducing the balance of
payments deficit to a manageable level. Our medium term objective was to place
the economy back on the path of high and sustainable growth.
6 . The new Government took several initiatives in pursuit of these objectives.
We took emergency measures to prevent a default in external payments, whichwould have been highly disruptive. The previous Government had already decidedto use a part of the gold held by the Reserve Bank of India to mobilise temporaryliquidity abroad. We did not consider it prudent to reverse this decision. But wepromised to redeem the gold at the earliest opportunity and we have kept our word.
12
We began the process of restoring macro-economic balance by seeking to reduce
the fiscal deficit which had grown very large in the previous year. We also embarkedon a medium term programme of structural reform, including new initiatives intrade policy and industrial policy aimed at improving the efficiency, productivityand international competitiveness of Indian industry. Our longer term objective isto evolve a pattern of production which is labour intensive and generates largeremployment opportunities in productive higher income jobs, and reduces thedisparities in income and wealth between rural and urban areas.
7 . Production was bound to suffer in a year of crisis and this has happened
in 1991-92. Agricultural production was below target in the kharif season, butprospects for the rabi crop look good. Industrial production suffered because ofsevere import compression and tight credit conditions. However, the infrastructuresectors, which are the foundation on which future industrial growth depends, havedone well. Overall, I expect GDP growth in 1991-92 to be around 2.5%. I expect adistinct improvement in 1992-93, and a return to high growth in 1993-94. However,this revival can be achieved only if we persevere unflinchingly with the process ofstabilisation and economic reform begun in the current year.
8 . Stabilisation and structural adjustment are never painless or quick,
especially when we are dealing with imbalances and structural rigidities which
have built up over several years. It will take sustained effort, over at least three
years, to bring the economy back to a path of rapid and sustainable growth. A firmcommitment to austerity, the pursuit of excellence and the promotion of efficiencyand productivity for the benefit of the common people has to be an integral part ofthis effort. Given our limited resources, our people cannot afford to copy the soullessconsumerism and the wasteful life styles of the affluent countries of the West.
Conspicuous consumption has to be actively discouraged. The virtues of thrift have
to be emphasised. The owners of wealth, as Gandhiji used to say, must learn toregard themselves as trustees of society. We cannot postpone structural reformand adjustment, but we must ensure that the burden of adjustment on the poorerand weaker sections of our society is ameliorated to the maximum possible extent.We are travelling through difficult and uncharted terrain, where no action is without
attendant risks, and success will not always be immediate. We need patience,
perseverance and national cohesion if we are to succeed.
9 . It has been alleged by some people that the reform programme has been
dictated by the IMF and the World Bank. We are founder members of these twoinstitutions and it is our right to borrow from them when we need assistance insupport of our programmes. As lenders, they are required to satisfy themselvesabout our capacity to repay loans and this is where conditionality comes into thepicture. All borrowing countries hold discussions with these institutions on theviability of the programmes for which assistance is sought. We have also held suchdiscussions. The extent of conditionality depends on the amount and the type ofassistance sought. However, I wish to state categorically that the conditions wehave accepted reflect no more than the implementation of the reform programmeas outlined in my letters of intent sent to the IMF and the World Bank, and arewholly consistent with our national interests. The bulk of the reform programme isbased on the election manifesto of our Party. There is no question of the Governmentever compromising our national interests, not to speak of our sovereignty.3
10. Although the full fruit of our policies will take time to materialise, I am
happy to report to the House that we have made substantial progress even in thisshort space of eight months. We have achieved our most immediate objective ofrestoring India’s credibility and pulling the economy back from the slide into financialchaos. Our foreign exchange reserves have been rebuilt to about Rs.11,000 crores.Non-Resident Indians are no longer withdrawing their deposits. We have successfullyconcluded arrangements with multi-lateral financing institutions such as the IMF,the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank to obtain quick disbursing fundsto support the balance of payments in the current year.
11. Inflation remains a difficult problem, and one to which we attach the
highest priority, because inflation hurts the poor and the fixed income earner most
of all. Inflation was accelerating in June 1991, when our Government came to
power, and the annual rate of inflation reached a peak of 16.7% in August 1991.Since then, the rate of inflation has come down to about 12%, but I am painfullyconscious that this is still far too high. We are determined to bring inflation undercontrol. This is why the Budget for 1991-92 focussed on the need for fiscal discipline.I am confident that as we persevere with fiscal discipline in 1992-93, and this we
must do if we want to bring prices under control, the rate of inflation will come
down substantially in the coming fiscal year.
12. Our ability to fight inflation has been considerably enhanced by the
improvement in our foreign exchange reserves. This has enabled us to relax therestrictions imposed last year on imports, thus ensuring near normal availability ofessential imports in the months ahead. This will help production and ease inflationary
pressure. The comfortable reserves position has also given the Government greater
flexibility to finance additional imports of essential items to deal with shortagesand break inflationary expectations.
13. The Government will remain fully vigilant on the prices front and will use
the Public Distribution System to counter inflation and in particular to protect thepoorer sections of the population from high prices and shortages. The Prime Ministerannounced on 1st January this year the launching of the revamped PublicDistribution System in about 1700 of the most backward blocks of the country. Weare determined to ensure that foodgrains and essential commodities reach the poorand the under-privileged in adequate quantities and at affordable prices.
14. Next to inflation, our major problem in the short term is the management
of the balance of payments. We have averted collapse and gained some flexibility,but a sustained improvement in our external payments position requires muchmore. Our export earnings have suffered badly this year, mainly because of thedisruption of trade with the former Soviet Union, and also because of recessionaryconditions in world markets. As a result, we have not been able to finance ournormal import requirements.
15. There are some who argue that all we need to do to solve our balance of
payments problem is to compress our imports. I would like to point out that import
compression has already been carried to the extreme and any further compression
can only be at the cost of both growth and employment. Imports of non-essential
consumer goods should certainly continue to be discouraged. However, we must
recognise that the only lasting solution to our balance of payments problem lies notin compressing imports but in a rapid expansion of exports. A growing economy4
needs a growing volume of imports of fuel, and other industrial inputs and also of
capital goods embodying modern technology. This is not to deny the importance of
self-reliance, but self-reliance in today’s world of integrated global markets cannotbe achieved merely by reducing import dependence and insulating the economy
from the world. Following that path will only lead to more import controls and
promote inefficiency and corruption. It will perpetuate an environment in which
Indian entrepreneurs will not have the flexibility they need to compete with other
developing countries in world markets. The resulting inability to export will actuallymake us more, rather than less, dependent on the outside world. Our vision of a
self-reliant economy should be of an economy which can meet all its import
requirements through exports, without undue dependence on artificial external
props such as foreign aid. I suggest to this august House that this is precisely the
vision of self-reliance as bequeathed to us by Jawaharlal Nehru as elaborated in
the Third Five Year Plan, and translated to the realities of today’s world.
16. While introducing the new trade policy last year, Government had indicated
that it would be our objective to move towards convertibility of the rupee on the
current account. The achievement of convertibility is a sign of economic strength
and true self reliance. We are now ready to take the next important step in this
direction by introducing a new system of partial convertibility. The new system is
designed to provide a powerful boost to our exports as well as to efficient importsubstitution. It will further reduce the scope for bureaucratic controls which
contribute to both inefficiency and corruption. It will also greatly reduce the incentive
for illegal transactions in foreign exchange. Under the new system all foreign
exchange remittances, whether earned through exports of goods or services, orremittances, will be converted into rupees in the following manner: 40% of theforeign exchange remitted will be converted at the official exchange rate while theremaining 60% will be converted at a market determined rate. The foreign exchange
surrendered at official exchange rates will be available to meet the foreign exchange
requirements of essential imports such as petroleum and oil products, fertilisers,defence and life saving drugs. All other imports of raw materials, components andalso capital goods will be made freely importable on open General Licence but theforeign exchange for these imports will have to be obtained from the market. There
will be a specified ‘negative list’ of raw materials, components and capital goods
which will continue to be importable only against licences. There will be no changein the import policy for consumer goods which will remain restricted as at present.Foreign exchange required for other payments on private account including travel,debt service payments, dividends, royalties and other remittances will also have tobe obtained at the market rate.
17. The new system will replace the system of Eximscrips. There will be no
need to issue Eximscrips for each export transaction as the new system will operatethrough the banks. Instead of a premium on Eximscrips, exporters will have thebenefit of the premium on 60% of their earnings in the foreign exchange market.What is more, the incentive for earning foreign exchange will now be available toremittances from our workers abroad. There is no reason why our workers, whoearn foreign exchange by the sweat of their hard labour abroad, should be deniedincentives presently given to exporters of goods and professional services. I saluteour workers from Kerala and other states working abroad. What I have announcedtoday is a small token of our appreciation of their magnificent contribution toIndia’s foreign exchange earnings.5
18. With these changes we will have achieved a major simplification of trade
policy, eliminating licensing and the associated bureaucratic delays and inefficiencies
over a wide range of items. We will also have introduced a self-balancing system tomanage a large part of the balance of payments. The total volume of imports will beautomatically regulated by the available volume of foreign exchange. Scarcity offoreign exchange will be reflected in a premium which will accrue to exporters andto those making remittances thus providing a built in incentive to increase this
flow. The details of the new exchange system are being notified by the Reserve
Bank of India. The changes in trade policy are being notified separately by theCommerce Ministry.
19. One of the reasons why foreign exchange is diverted to illegal channels is
the illegal import of gold. It is time we took a bold step to recognise the realities ofthe situation and legalise the import of gold. Government proposes to allow returning
Indians and NRIs to import 5kg of gold per passenger with a modest import duty
provided the gold as well as the import duty is financed from foreign exchangeearned abroad.
20. Many Honourable Members of this House have suggested that the
Government should introduce a Gold Bond, which would help to mobilise the idlegold resources of ordinary citizens to supplement official reserves. I had indicatedin Parliament that this should be considered only when the balance of paymentssituation improves, and adequate confidence has been built in the capacity of theGovernment to manage the economy. This has now been achieved. Our reservesare large and do not need supplementing, but I see no reason why patriotic citizensshould be denied the opportunity to contribute their mite to the development ofIndia’s economy. I propose to introduce a scheme under which citizens can obtaina Gold Bond in return for gold. The bond would be for a period of five to sevenyears and would be liquidated by return of gold, or equivalent value, at the optionof the holder. It would enjoy a small interest, which will not attract income-tax. Thebonds will also be free of wealth tax and gift tax. As an added incentive, holders ofsuch bonds will not be asked any questions about the source of the gold holding.The Reserve Bank of India is preparing a detailed proposal along these lines.
21. One of the initiatives of the new Industrial Policy is a new approach towards
foreign investment, which can play a vital role in upgrading our technology levels,integrating our industry into the global economy, and bringing in non-debt resources.The Government proposes to actively encourage foreign investment in criticalinfrastructure sectors where capacities are inadequate and needs for investmentare large. A policy to encourage private investment, including foreign investment,in the Power sector has already been announced. Another area which is critical forour future development, and for management of the balance of payments, is thehydro-carbon sector. Government has already announced that joint ventures willbe permitted in both exploration and development, including development of existingfields. The Government will welcome proposals for private investment, includingforeign investment, in production, refining and marketing of oil and gas, with aview to maximising the growth potential of this crucial area.
22. Concern is sometimes expressed that the policy of welcoming foreign
investment will hurt Indian industry and may jeopardise our sovereignty. Thesefears are misplaced. We must not remain permanent captives of a fear of the East6
India Company, as if nothing has changed in the past 300 years! India as a nation
is capable of dealing with foreign investors on its own terms. Indian industry has
also come of age, and is now ready to enter a phase where it can both compete with
foreign investment, and also cooperate with it. This is the trend all over the worldand we cannot afford to be left out. The House can rest assured that we haveenough policy instruments at our disposal to ensure that enterprises with foreignequity function in accordance with our national priorities.
23. The new approach to industrial policy calls for a review of regulations
such as the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, which introduced a great deal ofdetailed administrative control over companies where the foreign equity exceeded40% and also on non-resident Indians. The Reserve Bank of India has recentlyliberalised the procedure by granting general exemption from several of these controlsapplicable to Indian companies with foreign equity and to non-resident Indiansreturning to India. There are other restrictions which prevent Indian companiesand Indian residents from entering into various types of commercial relations withcompanies abroad without prior approval. These provisions are out of line with theneeds of today’s economy, where Indian businesses will have to deal extensivelywith their counterparts abroad, requiring expeditious decision making. TheGovernment proposes to introduce comprehensive amendments to the ForeignExchange Regulation Act to bring it in line with the requirements of the new policy.
24. In my Budget speech last year I had referred to the importance of financial
sector reform and had announced the establishment of a Committee on the FinancialSystem. The Narasimham Committee has submitted its report which has beentabled in Parliament. While commending the progress made by the banking systemin several directions, the Committee has drawn attention to serious problems posedby the deterioration in the financial health of the system because of low profitability,poor portfolio quality and inadequate provisioning for bad debts. The Committeehas made comprehensive recommendations for reform covering all aspects ofbanking, including the introduction of better capital adequacy norms, betterprovisioning for bad debts, rationalisation of the provisions for directed lendingand the associated interest rate structure. The thrust of the Committee’srecommendations is to move to a more efficient and competitive banking systemincluding a larger role for the private sector. Many of the recommendations can beimplemented very quickly. Others need further consideration. The Governmentproposes to implement the recommendations of the Committee in a phased manner.
25. As a first step in implementing the recommendations of the Narasimham
Committee, the Government has decided to begin a phased reduction in the StatutoryLiquidity Ratio (SLR) which at present locks up large quantities of bank funds in
relatively low yielding Government securities. Accordingly, the SLR on incremental
domestic liabilities of the commercial banks is being reduced from 38.5% to 30%with effect from 1992-93. This reduction is in line with the proposed reduction inthe fiscal deficit, which will reduce the Central Government’s need to borrow from
commercial banks. It will release funds for banks to expand credit to agriculture
and industry. The market borrowing of the States will not be affected. Steps arealso being taken to develop an active market for Government securities which willmake Government less dependent on statutory borrowing from the banks in future.
26. In view of the decline that has already taken place in the rate of inflation,7
it is possible to provide some relief in the interest rates charged by the Banks on
commercial advances. Honourable Members will be pleased to know that the ReserveBank of India is separately notifying a reduction in the floor level of interest rates
on commercial advances by one percentage point.
27. Financial sector reform also includes reform of the capital markets, which
will increasingly play a vital role in mobilising and allocating resources from thepublic. Several initiatives announced in my Budget speech last year have sincebeen implemented. The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI), has nowbeen established on a statutory basis. As we gain experience, additional powerswill be given to SEBI to strengthen its capability. The Government has also issuedguidelines which will govern the operation of new private sector mutual funds.Government has also decided to give permission to companies with a good trackrecord to issue convertible debentures or equity to investors abroad and to extendto these issues the same tax benefits as are available for Offshore Mutual Funds.This will enable domestic companies to tap the large pool of equity funds availablein world capital markets. We will also consider ways of allowing reputable foreigninvestors, such as pension funds, to invest in our capital markets, with suitablemechanisms to ensure that this does not threaten loss of management control.
28. The role of the Controller of Capital Issues in the Finance Ministry needs
to be reviewed, especially in the context of the emerging industrial and financial
scenario. The practice of Government control over capital issues, as well as over
pricing of issues, has lost its relevance in the changed circumstances of today. It istherefore proposed to do away with Government control over capital issues including
premium fixation. Companies will be allowed to approach the market directly
provided the issues are in conformity with published guidelines relating to disclosureand other matters related to investor protection. Government proposes to bring
necessary legislation to implement this decision.
29. In presenting the Budget for 1991-92 I had announced the Government’s
intention to establish a National Renewal Fund with the objective of ensuring that
the cost of technological change and modernisation does not fall too heavily on the
workers. This Fund was intended to provide a social safety net which would protect
the workers from the adverse consequences of technological transformation. The
Government has now established the Fund. The Fund will provide assistance to
cover the cost of retraining and redeployment of labour arising as a result of
modernisation and restructuring, and also provide compensation to labour affectedby restructuring of an industrial unit. Government also proposes to approach
multilateral financial institutions to meet part of the requirement for the National
Renewal Fund. It is estimated that about Rs.1000 crores would be available from
the International Development Association to be used for social safety net schemes
under the Fund including special schemes for unorganised sector workers. In thiscontext we would work out a scheme to upgrade the technology of handicrafts
which employ a very large number of people in the decentralised sector. Honourable
Members may rest assured that the Government is firmly resolved to protect the
interests of labour while dealing with the problems of industrial sickness and
structural reforms.
30. Agriculture is the foundation of our national prosperity and no strategy of
economic development can succeed in our country if it does not ensure rapid
growth of production and employment in agriculture. Nor can we hope to provide8
sufficient jobs for our growing rural labour force unless we can transform the
economy of our rural areas. This calls for a multi-pronged strategy involving effective
implementation of land reforms, large investments in irrigation and drainage,improvement in water management systems, control of land degradation,
strengthening of the credit system and improvements in agricultural extension and
research. Much of this effort has to be made by the State Governments sinceAgriculture is a State subject, and it is our hope that State Governments will give
these issues the highest priority. The Centre on its part is firmly committed to
continued funding and revamping of the various poverty alleviation schemes, whichare a major element in our development strategy.
31. Special attention needs to be paid to supporting innovative ideas for
generating income and employment in rural areas through support to various typesof agri-business. As an experimental measure, Government proposes to set up a
Small Farmers’ Agri-Business Consortium as an autonomous corporate entity funded
by the Reserve Bank of India, NABARD and IDBI. The Consortium will includerepresentation from various Development Boards dealing with individual crops and
Public Sector Corporations dealing with agriculture and agro-industries, private
sector companies, banks, scientific organisations and farmers’ associations. TheConsortium will function on the principles of economic efficiency, environmental
soundness and social equity and will organise 12 major projects in 1992-93 in
different parts of the country, based on a mix of enterprises with active participationby State Governments and farm families. The programme will be expanded as we
gain experience. We must begin a new chapter in our agricultural history where
farm enterprises yield not only more food, but more productive jobs and higherincome in rural areas.
32. I now turn to the Revised Estimates for 1991-92. Our major macro-
economic objective in 1991-92 was to reduce the fiscal deficit in order to restore
macro-economic balance in the economy. I am happy to inform the House that wehave succeeded in this objective.
33. The Budget Estimates for 1991-92 provided for a total expenditure of
Rs.113,422 crores. Unlike in the past, when Revised Estimates of expenditureshowed substantial increases over Budget Estimates, this year they are marginally
lower by Rs.320 crores. On the revenue side there has been a large shortfall of Rs.
3760 crores in customs revenue owing to the severe import compression duringmost of the year, but this has been partially offset by higher realisation from excise
duties and income tax so that the shortfall in gross tax revenues is Rs.1869 crores.
The, non-tax revenues and capital receipts are also significantly higher. As a resulttotal receipts are estimated at Rs.106,070 crores which is higher than the Budget
Estimates of Rs.105,703 crores.
34. The Budget deficit in the Revised Estimates for 1991-92 is Rs.7032 crores
which is lower than the Budget Estimate of Rs.7719 crores, and much lower than
in 1990-91, when the budget deficit reached Rs.11,347 crores. The fiscal deficit,
which takes into account all borrowing, is Rs.37,792 crores in the Revised Estimates.This is almost identical to the figure of Rs.37,727 crores in the Budget Estimates,
and is much lower than Rs. 44,650 crores in 1990-91. With this, we have successfully
reduced fiscal deficit from about 8.4% of GDP in 1990-9 to around 6.5% in1991-92.9
35. The reduction in the deficit was made possible by enforcement of strict
discipline on the expenditure side. Certain additional expenditure provisions becamenecessary after the Budget was presented. The most notable of these was theadditional requirement for fertiliser subsidy, consequent on the decision to restrictthe price increase from 40% proposed initially to only 30%, and also the fact thatthe rupee cost of imported fertilisers was higher than assumed in the BudgetEstimates. As a result, the provision for fertiliser subsidy has been increased fromRs.4000 crores in the Budget Estimates to Rs.4800 crores in the Revised Estimates.Even this amount does not fully cover the subsidy claims for 1991-92 and someamount will spill over into the next year as is normal commercial practice. A separateprovision of Rs.405 crores has been included in the Revised Estimates for the
scheme for supplying fertilisers to small farmers at the pre-revised prices.
36. I have also had to increase the Budget provision for food subsidy by
Rs.250 crores on account of the delay in increasing issue prices. An extra amount
of Rs.550 crores has also been provided for the export subsidy. This subsidy wasabolished on 3rd July 1991, but the claims in the pipeline appear to be much morethan was originally anticipated. These demands for additional expenditure havehowever been offset by savings located within the sanctioned Budgets of variousMinistries.
37. The difficult resource position in 1991-92 had its impact on Plan
expenditure. Overall resource constraints forced the Government to restrict Budgetsupport for the Central Plan and the Revised Estimates for this item are 7% lessthan Budget Estimates. Despite the marginal reduction, efforts were made to ensurethat projects of high priority are not affected, and the reduction has been achievedmainly by regulating the release of funds to match the actual progress of schemeson the ground. However, Central Assistance for State and UT Plans was stepped up
by Rs. 651 crores, mainly on account of larger rupee requirements of externally
aided projects.
38. The House will be happy to note that even though the Central Government’s
own expenditure in the Revised Estimates is below the Budget Estimates, the totaltransfer to the States by way of share of taxes, and Central Plan assistance ishigher than the Budget Estimates by Rs. 1683 crores. This more than offsets theshortfall in small savings loans of Rs.1365 crores. We have not allowed our fiscaldifficulties to come in the way of meeting our obligations to the States in any way.
39. I now turn to the Budget Estimates for 1992-93. The Eighth Five Year
Plan commences from 1st April 1992 and aims at the objective of achieving nearfull employment in a period of ten years. The investment requirements of everysector are large, and it is important that Plan allocations should enable implementing
agencies to make a good start, especially in the infrastructure sectors. However we
have had to work within the limits imposed by the continuing need to restoremacro-economic balance, which is essential if we are to contain inflation and managethe balance of payments. This calls for a further reduction in the fiscal deficit in1992-93. Larger Plan expenditure can be accommodated within a smaller fiscaldeficit if, apart from increasing tax and non- tax revenues, Government’s non-Planexpenditure can be contained. I must admit that this has been a daunting task.
40. Interest charges are the largest single item of non-Plan expenditure and
account for Rs. 32,000 crores in the Budget Estimates for 1992-93. This represents10
an increase of Rs. 4750 crores over the Revised Estimates for 1991-92, which is
larger than the increase in total non-Plan expenditure of Rs. 4405 crores. This
means that in 1992-93 all other items of non-Plan expenditure taken together are
actually lower than in the current year. Honourable Members will appreciate thatinterest charges are a committed expenditure, reflecting the cumulative effect ofpast deficits. This item can be controlled only by reducing the reliance on borrowedfunds, and I intend to do this by reducing the fiscal deficit for 1992-93. However,the benefit of this action will be felt only by Finance Ministers presenting the
Budget in future. I venture to think that my successors as Finance Minister will be
able to sleep far more peacefully than has been my lot thus far.
41. For the Defence Services I am providing Rs. 17,500 crores, an increase of
7% over the provision of Rs. 16,350 crores in the current year. Combined with
some economies and tight expenditure control, I am confident that this allocation
will enable our armed forces to fulfil their responsibilities in ensuring the security
and defence of the nation.
42. In the election Manifesto of our Party, we had committed ourselves to find
an innovative solution to the long standing demand of Defence pensioners for ‘One
Rank One Pension’. An Empowered Committee, under the chairmanship of Raksha
Mantri and comprising ex-servicemen and Members of Parliament representing the
major political parties has looked into the issue and its recommendations have
been accepted by the Government. Accordingly, Government has sanctioned ad
hoc increase in the pension rates applicable to Defence personnel. This decisioneffective from 1.1.92 will benefit over six lakh Armed Forces pensioners of all
ranks, of whom over two lakhs are Jawans, some of whom retired after 1.1.86.
Government has also ordered grant of ex-gratia Family Pension to the families of
deceased Reservists not in receipt of Family Pension. These benefits will entail an
expenditure of over Rs. 120 crores per annum at current rates of dearness relief.
43. Subsidies are another important component in non-Plan expenditure. Last
year, Food, Fertiliser and Export subsidies were the three major subsidies and
their rapid growth has been one of the main factors behind the unchecked growth
of non-Plan expenditure. We made an important change this year by abolishing
export subsidies. However, some subsidy payments still remain in the pipeline, andI am providing Rs. 480 crores on this account.
44. Food subsidy is a part of our system of food security for the poorer and
weaker sections of our population and is a basic element in our social policy. I am
providing an allocation of Rs. 2500 crores on this account which should be sufficient
for the normal requirements of the system. The revamped Public Distribution System
being implemented in 1700 backward blocks will require an additional allocation of
Rs. 250 crores on account of the additional subsidy and also the cost of constructinga large number of godowns with a capacity of 3 lakh tonnes. The allocation for
these items will be augmented in the course of the year to meet the requirements
fully.
45. This brings me to fertiliser subsidy which has grown into the largest
single subsidy in our system. There is no doubt that fertiliser is an essentialingredient for agricultural production, and agricultural development is vital not
only for economic growth in general, but also to ensure rising levels of income and
employment in rural areas. In 1980-81, the fertiliser subsidy was 12% of the total
allocation in the Central and State Plans taken together for Agriculture, Rural11
Development, Special Area Programmes and Irrigation and Flood Control. It increased
to 33% in 1991-92. A Parliamentary Committee is currently looking into the whole
issue of fertiliser pricing and subsidy including alternatives for restructuring thesubsidy. I propose to wait for the report of this Committee and take a view, on this
matter later in the year. Taking all factors into account, I am making a provision of
Rs. 5000 crores for fertiliser subsidy in 1992-93.
46. Other items of non-Plan expenditure have been tightly constrained in the
allocations provided to keep the fiscal deficit within manageable levels. I haverequested my colleagues in all Ministries to review the expenditure control system
in their Ministries to ensure that every possible step is taken to enforce economy
so that the provisions being made in the Budget Estimates are not exceeded. As in
the last two years, in the Budget Estimates for 1992-93 also no separate provision
is being made for the additional dearness allowance installments that may become
payable in that year. All Ministries will be expected to absorb the additional
expenditure on this account within the approved Budget provisions.
47. With these provisions, the total allocation for non-Plan expenditure stands
at Rs.84,475 crores, higher by Rs. 4,405 crores compared to the Revised Estimates
for 1991-92. But then, as I mentioned earlier, the increase in interest expenditure
alone is Rs.4,750 crores. Honourable Members would appreciate that the large
requirements for interest and subsidies make it difficult to reduce non-Planexpenditure further and this limits the extent to which the budget can support
Plan expenditure. Nevertheless, I have tried to provide adequately for all the critical
areas of Plan expenditure.
48. Central assistance for the Plans of States and Union Territories is being
stepped up from Rs. 14,710 crores in Budget Estimates 1991-92 to Rs. 16,111crores in 1992-93. This increase of Rs. 1401 crores, coupled with an increase of
Rs. 2237 crores in the share of taxes, even at the existing levels of taxation, should
enable the States to substantially increase the allocations for the various Plan
programmes.
49. The total Central Sector Plan outlay for 1992-93 has been fixed at Rs.48,407
crores. This is based on budgetary support for the Plan of Rs. 18,501 crores, and
a contribution of Rs. 29,906 crores from internal and extra-budgetary resources ofthe various undertakings/enterprises. The internal and extra-budgetary resources
show a sharp increase of 25% over the current year’s level and this is critical to
achieve the substantial increase in the Plan outlays of the various infrastructure
sectors. Thus the outlay for the Railways stands increased from Rs. 5325 crores in
the current year’s Budget Estimates to Rs. 5700 crores in the next year’s Plan;Shipping from Rs. 617 crores to Rs. 1222 crores; Civil Aviation from Rs. 433 crores
to Rs. 1036 crores; Telecommunications from Rs. 3203 crores to Rs. 4500 crores
and Fertiliser industry from Rs. 411 crores to Rs. 1234 crores. The outlay for
Power has been fixed at Rs.6411 crores, and for Petroleum at Rs. 6054 crores.
50. The allocation for Rural Development Programmes in the Budget is Rs.2610
crores, which is somewhat lower than the Budget Estimates of 1991-92 though it
is higher than the Revised Estimates. This however presents only part of the totaleffort we are making in support of the weaker sections in our rural areas. The
Government is deeply conscious of its special responsibility to protect the poorer
sections of our society, especially in rural areas from the burdens that would
otherwise be forced upon them as the economy goes through the process of macro-12
economic stabilisation and economic restructuring. It is therefore proposed to
earmark an additional allocation of Rs. 500 crores from the corpus of the National
Renewal Fund for employment generation schemes to supplement the normalemployment generation through the Jawahar Rozgar Yojana, particularly in those
areas where the pressure for such employment is seen to be more than in earlier
years. The additional allocation of foodgrains, through the Public Distribution System
in the 1700 most backward blocks at a subsidised rate is another important step
for protecting these vulnerable sections of society from the pressure on prices.Taking the proposed additional allocations on these accounts together with the
Plan provision in the Budget, the total allocation to rural development would show
a substantial increase over the current year.
51. The Plan outlay for the Family Welfare programme has been stepped up
from Rs. 749 crores in the current year to Rs. 1000 crores next year reflecting the
Government’s firm commitment to tackle the population problem. The outlay for
the programmes of the Ministry of Welfare has also been increased from Rs. 479crores to Rs. 530 crores reflecting fully Government’s commitment to protection of
the weaker sections of society.
52. Despite severe resource constraints, most of the other sectors which are
largely dependent on budgetary support for their Plan outlays have been provided
at least the same order of budget support as in the current year. I would have likedto provide more but we also have to live within the constraint of available resources.
I would particularly like to point out that we must give up the practice of judging
the quality of our Plan effort by the increase in the outlays provided for in the
Budget. Our resources are scarce and there is a vast unexploited potential for
improving the productivity of available resource use. There has to be much tighter
scrutiny of various claims on resources and much greater emphasis on how to get
more out of available resources. We cannot simply spend our way into prosperity.
53. Gross tax receipts at existing rates of taxation are estimated next year at
Rs.75,541 crores compared to Rs. 67,300 crores in the current year’s RevisedEstimates. The States’ share of taxes is placed at Rs. 18,492 crores showing anincrease of Rs.1293 crores over the current year’s Revised Estimates. Non-taxrevenues next year show an increase of Rs. 2689 crores over the current year’sRevised Estimates. This includes Rs. 416 crores of deferred dividends from theRailways. Next year’s estimates assume an increase of Rs. 423 crores from dividendsand profits of public sector enterprises. Unlike in the past, it is proposed to ensurethat these enterprises transfer as dividend or surplus profits, a reasonable part oftheir post tax profits instead of determining the dividend payable merely on thebasis of capital investment. The Reserve Bank of India will also be transferring alarger share of its profits.
54. Under Capital Receipts, I have taken credit for market borrowing of Rs.
5000 crores. This is significantly lower than the amount of Rs. 7500 crores in theBudget Estimates for the current year and reflects our objective of reducing thefiscal deficit and consequently the recourse to borrowed funds. External assistanceincluding grants, but net of repayments, is estimated at Rs. 5374 crores.
55. The disinvestment in public sector equity undertaken in the current year
has been successfully completed. There is scope for continuing this process in1992-93 with a view to raising non-inflationary resources for development. I am13
accordingly taking credit for a receipt of Rs. 2500 crores from further disinvestment
of equity holding in public sector enterprises. In addition to this amount, Government
will consider a further sale of equity of Rs. 1000 crores to provide resources to theNational Renewal Fund in 1992-93, which can be used for various schemes ofassistance to workers in the unorganised sector, including women workers, whomay be adversely affected by the process of economic restructuring. These resourceswill also be used to fund the special employment creating schemes in backward
areas which I have mentioned earlier.
56. Thus, at existing rates of taxation, total receipts are placed at Rs. 114,
215 crores and total expenditure at Rs. 119,087 crores. This leaves a gap of Rs.4872 crores.
PART B
57. While presenting the budget last year, I drew attention to the need for a
comprehensive reform of both the direct and indirect tax system and had explainedthat lack of time had made it difficult to do as much as I would have liked in thisregard. Subsequently, the Government set up a Tax Reforms Committee under theChairmanship of Dr. Raja J. Chelliah. The Committee has since submitted itsInterim Report. The Report distills the wisdom of some of our most distinguishedexperts on the complex subject of reform of both direct and indirect taxes and Ihave drawn heavily upon it in framing my Budget proposals. The summary ofrecommendations contained in the Report is separately being placed in Parliamentto enable fuller appreciation of the analysis of the Committee and the rationale forits recommendations.
58. There is a consensus among fiscal experts, based on experience gained all
over the world, that a moderately progressive tax structure combined with strongenforcement is the best way of encouraging honesty and voluntary tax compliance.The Chelliah Committee has endorsed this view and has recommended that ourdirect tax system would be more effective if the income tax regime had lower ratesof taxation, with a narrower spread between the entry rate and the maximummarginal rate, and a minimum of tax incentives. I agree with this assessment andI propose to restructure the personal income tax in the following manner. I proposeto enhance the exemption limit for income tax levy from Rs.22,000 at present toRs.28,000. This will provide substantial relief to the taxpayers in the lower incomegroup and I am sure it will be welcomed by the Honourable Members, many ofwhom had urged such an adjustment even last year. I hope this will convince themthat I am an attentive and sensitive listener to what goes on in this august House.I further propose that there will only be three tax rate slabs, with the entry rate of20 per cent. applicable upto Rs. 50,000, a middle slab of 30 per cent. uptoRs.1,00,000 and a maximum rate of 40 per cent. above Rs.1 lakh. A correspondingrevision is also being made in the case of specified Hindu undivided families. Becauseof the severe resource constraints, I am compelled to retain the surcharge at 12 percent. for one more year; but this will be payable only by those whose incomeexceeds rupees one lakh.
59. With the reduction in tax rates, a number of tax exemptions, which
conferred large benefits on higher income tax payers are no longer justified. I,
therefore, propose to abolish the deductions under sections 80L, 80CCA and 80CCB14
of the Income-tax Act. The computation of income from house property is also
being rationalised in respect of certain deductions presently being allowed. The
provision under section 88, which provides for tax rebate in respect of specified
savings such as Life Insurance, Provident funds etc. will however continue, as
these are normally availed of by fixed salary earners. In fact, I propose to widen itsscope by including within its purview contributions to Pension Funds set up by the
National Housing Bank and by Mutual Funds. I am also providing that those who
wish to continue contributing to the savings schemes which until now qualified for
deduction under section 80CCA and 80CCB, can get tax rebate under Section 88
of the Income-tax Act.
60. It is said that the child is the father of man, but some of our taxpayers
have converted children into tax shelters for their fathers. The tax law provides for
clubbing of income from gifts given by parents but this does not apply to otherincome, including income from other gifted assets, and the practice of cross gifting
is widely used to evade clubbing. The Chelliah Committee has recommended that
in order to plug this loophole, which accounts for a substantial leakage of revenue,
the income of a minor child should be clubbed with that of the parent. There ismerit in this suggestion and I propose to accept it. Recognising however the existenceof a number of child prodigies, especially child artistes in our country, I propose toexclude their professional income, as also any wage income of minors, from thepurview of such clubbing. The practice of clubbing the income of minor childrenwith that of the parent for tax purposes is in vogue in a number of countries.
61. The revenue loss on account of the restructuring of income-tax rates as
traditionally estimated will be Rs.1500 crores. However, this will be offset by theproposed abridgement in the concessions and tax exemptions and the change inthe tax treatment of minor’s income. If, as I expect, lower tax rates will lead tobetter tax compliance, there will be a net revenue gain even though it is not possibleto quantify it. If tax-payers cooperate with me and revenue earnings go upsignificantly, I propose to reward the tax-payers with a further cut in income taxrates. The ball is now in their court.
62. In a country with a population of over 800 million, hardly 7 million persons
pay income and corporate tax. It is therefore necessary to attract new taxpayersinto the tax net. With this end in view, I propose to introduce a presumptive taxsystem in respect of shop keepers and other retail traders with an annual turnoverbelow Rs. 5 lakhs. In order to enable them to avoid the difficulty of maintaining
detailed account books, filing a complicated tax return and going through the
normal assessment procedure, a simplified scheme has been worked out underwhich the taxpayer will give only brief particulars of his turnover and pay justRs.1400 as tax for that year. This should enable potential taxpayers in this categoryto overcome their psychological hesitation of getting into the tax system. The schemeis being introduced on a purely optional basis and is intended only for those who
may have taxable income and wish to avail of this simplified procedure. With the
increase in the exemption limit to Rs.28,000, those with a turnover of less than Rs.2.5 lakhs to Rs.3 lakhs may well find that they do not have to pay this presumptivetax.
63. The present tax treatment of long term capital gains has been criticised
on the ground that the deduction allowed in computing taxable gain is not relatedto the period of time for which the asset has been held. It does not take into15
account the inflation that may have occurred over time. The Chelliah Committee
has suggested a system of indexation to take care of the problem and I propose toaccept its recommendation. Taxable capital gains will be computed by allowing thecost of the asset to be adjusted for general inflation before deducting from the saleproceeds. The adjustment factor for each year will be notified by the CentralGovernment. The long term capital gains thus computed will be taxed at 20 percent. in the case of individuals and HUFs, 40 per cent. in the case of companies,firms, associations of persons and bodies of individuals, and 30 per cent. in thecase of others. The new system will favour those whose capital gains accrue over alonger period, while those making capital gains over a shorter period will pay ahigher tax. This is as it should be. The cut off date for valuation is also beingshifted from 1st April, 1974 to 1st April, 1981. With these changes, I propose towithdraw the standard deduction in computing taxable capital gains and also theexemptions under section 54E for capital gains invested in specified assets andsection 53 in respect of capital gains arising from sale of residential house.
64.1 While I am simplifying the income-tax structure, I should extend some
concessions directly to certain categories of taxpayers who deserve sympatheticconsideration from the Government.
64.2 Many individuals have to maintain handicapped dependants which often
imposes a heavy burden upon them and this is a burden which we should lightenas much as we can. I therefore propose to increase the deduction available to suchpersons from Rs.6,000 at present to Rs.12,000 per year. Further, the scope of thistax concession is being made available to all taxpayers irrespective of their income.
64.3W omen who take up employment deserve special consideration and
encouragement. I, therefore, propose to increase the standard deduction from
Rs.12,000 to Rs.15,000 in the case of working women having total income upto
seventy five thousand rupees. I hope this will convince Honourable lady members
of this House about my commitment to the cause of social and economic uplift ofIndian women. The only quid pro quo I expect from them is to defend the budget
regardless of their party affiliations.
64.4T aking note of the financial difficulties often encountered by persons in
old age and as a token of my regard for such senior citizens, I propose to give a tax
rebate of 10 per cent. on the net tax payable by persons who have completed 65
years of age and whose gross total income is below Rs.50,000.
64.5 Having regard to the fluctuating nature of income earned by authors,
playwrights, artists, musicians, actors and sportsmen and in recognition of theircontribution to the enrichment of the cultural life of the nation, the tax rebate forthem in respect of specified savings under section 88 of the Income-tax Act will be
increased from 20 per cent. to 25 per cent.
64.6 The victims of the Bhopal Gas Disaster are to get compensation on the
basis of the Supreme Court judgement. Having regard to the human dimensions ofthe tragedy, I propose to exempt, in all cases, the compensation received by suchrecipients from income tax liability.
64.7I have received several representations for widening the scope of exempting
medical expenses for both salaried and self-employed persons. I propose to
substantially liberalise the provisions relating to hospitalisation and medicalGOVERNMENT OF INDIA
BUDGET 2021-2022
SPEECH
OF
NIRMALA SITHARAMAN
MINISTER OF FINANCE
February 1,  2021CONTENTS  
PART -A 
  Page No.  
 Introduction  1 
 Health and Wellbeing  5 
 Physical and Financial Capital and Infrastructure  7 
 Inclusive Development for Aspirational India  19 
 Reinvigorating Human Capital  22 
 Innovation and R&D  23 
 Minimum Government, Maximum Governance  24 
 Fiscal Position  25 
 
PART B  
Direct Tax Proposals  28 
 Relief to Senior Citizens  
 Reduction in Time for Income Tax Proceedings  
 Setting up the Dispute Resolution Committee  
 Faceless ITAT  
 Relaxation to NRI  
 Exemption from Audit  
 Relief for Dividend  
 Attracting foreign investment into infrastructure sector  
 Affordable Housing/Rental Housing  
 Tax incentives to IFSC  
 Pre-filling of Returns  
 Relief to Small Trusts  
 Labour Welfare  
 
Indirect Tax Proposals  33 
 GST  
 Custom Duty Rationalization  
 Electronic and Mobile  Phone Industry  
 Iron and Steel  
 Textile  
 Chemicals  (ii) 
 
 Gold and Silver  
 Renewable Energy  
 Capital Equipment  
 MSME Products  
 Agriculture Products  
Annexures  
 Annexures to Part A of the Speech  37 
 
 Health and Wellbeing – Expenditure  
 Flagship Projects: Roads and Highways  
 Highlights of Disinvestment/Strategic Disinvestment Policy  
 MSP Purchases of Agricultural Commodities  
 Initiatives on Education as part of NEP  
 Statement of Extra Budgetary Resources  
(Govt. fully serviced bonds, NSSF loan and other resources)  
 
 Annexures to Part B of the Speech               45 
 Direct Tax   
 Indirect Tax    
 
Budget 202 1-2022 
 
Speech of  
Nirmala Sitharaman  
Minister of Finance  
Febru ary 1, 202 1 
Hon’ble Speaker,  
I present the  Budget for the year 202 1-2022.  
Introduction  
1. Honourable Speaker, the preparation of this Budget was undertaken 
in circumstances like never before. We knew of calamities that have 
affected a country or a region within a country, but what we have endured 
with COVID -19 through 2020 is sui generis.  
 
2. Whe n I presented the Budget 2020 -21, we could not have imagined 
that the global economy, already in throes of a slowdown, would be pushed 
into an unprecedented contraction.  
 
3. We could not have also imagined then that our people as those in 
other countries would have to endure the loss of near and dear ones and 
suffer hardships brought about due to a health crisis.  
 
4. The risk of not having a lockdown was far too high. Within 48 hours 
of declaring a three -week -long complete lockdown, the Prime Minister 
announc ed the Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Yojana, valued at `2.76 lakh 
crores  – this provided,  free food grain to 800 million people, free cooking 
gas for 80 million families for months, and cash directly to over 400 million 
farmers, women, elderly, the poor and  the needy.  
 
 2 
 
 
 5. Even as a large section of citizens stayed home, milk, vegetable, and 
fruit -suppliers, health and sanitary workers, truck drivers, railways and 
public transport workers, bank employees, electricity workers, our 
annadata s, police, firemen, and  the armed forces, all had to go about their 
work as normal, but with the additional anxiety of the virus hanging over 
them. We recognise this, and I think I speak on behalf of everybody in this 
august House, when I express my heartfelt gratitude to these men and 
women, for how they were able to carry out their work and duty, to provide 
for the nation’s basics, over those crucial months.  
 
6. Speaker Sir, for public good, Honourable Members of Parliament 
and Members of Legislative Assemblies too offered their s alaries.  
 
7. In May 2020, the government announced the AtmaNirbhar Bharat 
package (ANB 1.0) . To sustain the recovery, further into the year, we also 
rolled out two more AtmaNirbhar Bharat packages (ANB 2.0 and ANB 3.0). 
Total financial impact of all AtmaNirbh ar Bharat packages including 
measures taken by RBI was estimated to about `27.1 lakh crores  which 
amounts to more than 13% of GDP.  
 
8. As a government, we kept a watch on the situation and were 
proactive in our responses. The government, led by the Prime Minister, 
stretched its resources to deliver for most vulnerable sections of our society 
– the poorest of the poor, the Dalits, Tribals,  the elderly, the migrant 
workers, and our children. The PMGKY, the three ANB packages, and 
announcements made later were like five mini -budgets in themselves.  
 
9. The AtmaNirbhar Packages accelerated our pace of structural 
reforms. Redefinition of MSMEs , Commercialisation of the Mineral Sector, 
Agriculture and Labour Reforms, Privatisation of Public Sector Undertakings, 
One Nation One Ration Card, and Production Linked Incentive Schemes are 
some of the notable reforms carried out during this period.  Fac eless 
Income Tax Assessment, DBT and Financial Inclusion are the others.  
 
10. Today, India has two vaccines available, and has begun medically 
safeguarding not only her own citizens against COVID -19, but also those of 
100 or more countries. It is added comfor t to know that two or more 
vaccines are also expected soon.  
 3 
 
 
 11. Honourable Prime Minister launched the vaccination drive by 
crediting and thanking our scientists. We are ever grateful for the strength 
and rigour of their efforts.  
 
12. Having said that, we are all  reminded time and again that our fight 
against COVID -19 continues into 2021.  
 
13. Now, just as it had happened after the two World Wars, there are 
signs that the political, economic, and strategic relations in the post COVID 
world are changing. This moment in  history is the dawn of a new era – one 
in which India is well -poised to truly be the land of promise and hope.  
 
''Faith is the bird that feels the light and sings when the dawn is still dark''.  
-Rabindranath Tagore  
(Fireflies – A Collection of Aphorisms)  
 
14. In this spirit, I can’t help but recall the joy that we, as a cricket -loving 
nation, felt after Team India’s recent spectacular success in Australia. It has 
reminded us of all the qualities that we as a people, particularly our youth, 
epitomise of having  abundant promise and the unsuppressed thirst to 
perform and succeed.  
 
15. Today, data shows that India now has one of the lowest death rate 
of 112 per million  population and one of the lowest active cases of  about 
130 per million. This has laid the foundation  to the revival we are seeing 
now in the economy.  
 
16. This Budget will be the first of this new decade. This Budget will also 
be a digital Budget and that has happened with all your support.  
 
17. So far, only three times has a Budget followed a contraction in the  
economy. All such contractions were as a result of situations typical to 
India. This time, the contraction in our economy is due to a global 
pandemic, just like in several other countries.  
 
18. Having said that, I want to confidently state that our Government  is 
fully prepared to support and facilitate the economy’s reset. This Budget 
provides every opportunity for our economy to raise and capture the pace 
that it needs for sustainable growth.  
 
19. 2021 is the year of many important milestones for our history. I 
mention a few of these: It is the 75th year of Independence; 60 years of 
Goa’s accession to India; 50 years of the 1971 India -Pakistan War; it will be 4 
 
 
 the year of the 8th Census of Independent India; it will also be India’s turn 
at the BRICS Presidency; the  year for our Chandrayaan -3 Mission; and the 
Haridwar Maha Kumbh.  
 
20. Honourable Speaker, before I commence Part A of the Budget, I 
want to take a moment to acknowledge how isolating and distancing 
seemed like insurmountable challenges for a country like ours  that has 
people coming together in times of crises. It hurt us in many ways. I bow my 
head in respect to every citizen, for the endurance shown in facing what 
was an undeniably a tough year for all our physical and mental well -being.  
 
 
PART A  
 
21. In Part A,  I wish to lay a vision for AtmaNirbhar Bharat.  
 
22. AtmaNirbharta is not a new idea. Ancient India was largely self -
reliant, and equally, a business epicentre of the world.  
 
23. AtmaNirbhar Bharat is an expression of 130 crores  Indians who have 
full confidence in their capabilities and skills.  
 
24. We are already part of International groupings such as the G20 and 
BRICS. The Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure and the 
International Solar alliance are realities today due to India’s efforts.  
 
25. The proposals in Part A will further strengthen the sankalp of Nation 
First, Doubling Farmer’s Income, Strong Infrastructure, Healthy India, Good 
Governance, Opportunities for Youth, Education for All, Women 
Empowerment, and Inclusive Development, among others.  
 
26. Additionally, also on the path to fast -implementation are the 13 
promises we had made in the Budget of 2015 -16  which were to materialise 
during the Amrut Mahotsav of 2022, on the 75th year of our Independence. 
They too resonate  with this vision of AtmaNirbharta.  
 
27. The Budget proposals for 202 1-2022 rest on 6 pillars.  
i. Health and Wellbeing  
ii. Physical & Financial Capital, and Infrastructure  5 
 
 
 iii. Inclusive Development for Aspirational India  
iv. Reinvigorating Human Capital  
v. Innovation and R&D  
vi. Minimum Government and Maximum Governance  
 
1. Health and Wellbeing  
 
28. Even at the outset, I would like to say that the investment on Health 
Infrastructure in this Budget has increased substantially. Progressively, as 
institutions absorb more, we shall commit more.  
 
29. Taking a holistic approach to Health, we focus on strengthening 
three areas: Preventive, Curative, and Wellbeing.  
 
Health Systems  
 
30. A new centrally sponsored scheme, PM AtmaNirbhar Swasth Bharat 
Yojana , will be launched with an outlay of  about  ` 64,180 crores over 6 
years. This will develop capacities of primary, secondary, and tertiary care 
Health Systems, strengthen existing national institutions, and create new 
institutions, to cater to detection and cure of new and emerging diseases. 
This will be  in addition to the National Health Mission. The main 
interventions under the scheme are:  
 
a. Support for 17,788 rural and 11,024 urban Health and Wellness 
Centers  
b. Setting up integrated public health labs in all districts and 3382 block 
public health units in  11 states;  
c. Establishing critical care hospital blocks in 602 districts and 12 
central institutions;  
d. Strengthening of the National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC), its 
5 regional branches and 20 metropolitan health surveillance units;  
e. Expansion of the In tegrated Health Information Portal to all 
States/UTs to connect all public health labs;  
f. Operationalisation of 17 new Public Health Units and strengthening 
of 33 existing Public Health Units at Points of Entry, that is at 32 
Airports, 11 Seaports and 7 land  crossings;  
g. Setting up of 15 Health Emergency Operation Centers and 2 mobile 
hospitals; and  6 
 
 
 h. Setting up of a national institution for One Health, a Regional 
Research Platform for WHO South East Asia Region, 9 Bio -Safety 
Level III laboratories and 4 regional  National Institutes for Virology.  
 
Nutrition  
 
31. To strengthen nutritional content, delivery, outreach, and outcome, 
we will merge the Supplementary Nutrition Programme and the Poshan 
Abhiyan and launch the Mission Poshan  2.0. We shall adopt an intensified 
strategy to improve nutritional outcomes across 112 Aspirational Districts.  
 
Universal Coverage of Water Supply  
 
32. The World Health Organisation has repeatedly stressed the 
importance of clean water, sanitation, and clean  environment, as a pre 
requisite to achieving universal health.  
 
33. The Jal Jeevan Mission (Urban), will be launched.  It aims at universal 
water supply in all 4,37 8 Urban Local Bodies with 2.86 crores  household tap 
connections, as well as liquid waste management in 500 AMRUT cities. It 
will be implemented over 5 years, with an outlay of `2,87,0 00 crores.  
 
Swachch Bharat, Swasth Bharat  
 
34. For further swachhta  of urban India, we intend to focus on complete  
faecal sludge management and waste water treatment, source segregation 
of garbage, reduction in single -use plastic, reduction in air pollution by 
effectively managing waste from construction -and-demolition activities and 
bio-remediation of all legacy dump  sites. The Urban Swachh Bharat Mission  
2.0 will be implemented with a total financial allocation of `1,41,678 crores 
over a period of 5 years from 2021 -2026.  
 
Clean Air  
 
35. To tackle the burgeoning problem of  air pollution, I propose to 
provide an amount of `2,217 crores for 42 urban centres with a million -plus 
population in this budget.  
 7 
 
 
 Scrapping Policy  
 
36. We are separately announcing a voluntary vehicle scrapping policy, 
to phase out old and unfit vehicles. This will help in encouraging fuel -
efficient, environment friendly vehicles, thereby reducing vehicular 
pollution and oil import bill.  Vehicles would u ndergo fitness tests in 
automated fitness centres after 20 years in case of personal vehicles, and 
after 15 years in case of commercial vehicles. Details of the scheme will be 
separately shared by the Ministry.  
 
Vaccines  
 
37. The Pneumococcal Vaccine, a Made in India product, is presently 
limited to only 5 states will be rolled out across the country. This will avert 
more than 50,000 child deaths annually.  
 
38. I have provided `35,000 crores  for Covid -19 vaccine in BE 2021 -22. I 
am committed to provide further funds if required.  
 
39. The Budget outlay for Health and Wellbeing  is `2,23,846 crores  in BE 
2021 -22 as against this year’s BE of `94,452 crores  an increase of  137 
percentage. The details o f the same are at Annexure I of  the Speech.  
 
2. Physical and Financial  Capital and Infrastructure  
 
Atma Nirbhar Bharat – Production Linked Incentive scheme (PLI)  
 
40. For a USD 5 trillion economy, our manufacturing sector has to grow 
in double digits on a sustained basis. Our manufacturing companies need to 
become an integral par t of global supply chains, possess core competence 
and cutting -edge technology. To achieve all of the above, PLI schemes to 
create manufacturing global champions for an AtmaNirbhar Bharat have 
been announced for 13 sectors.  For this, the government has co mmitted 
nearly `1.97 lakh crores , over 5 years starting FY 2021 -22. This initiative will 
help bring scale and size in key sectors, create and nurture global 
champions and provide jobs to our youth.   
 
 8 
 
 
 Textiles  
 
41. To enable the textile industry to become globally competitive, 
attract large investments and boost employment generation, a scheme of 
Mega Investment Textiles Parks (MITRA)  will be launched in addition to the 
PLI scheme. This will create world class infras tructure with plug and play 
facilities to enable create global champions in exports. 7 Textile Parks will 
be established over 3 years.  
 
Infrastructure  
 
42. The National Infrastructure Pipeline (NIP) which I announced in 
December 2019 is the first -of-its-kind, whole -of-government exercise ever 
undertaken by Government of India. The NIP was launched with 6835 
projects; the project pipeline has now expanded to 7 ,400 projects. Around 
217 projects worth `1.10 lakh crores under some key infrastructure 
Ministries have been completed.  
 
43. The NIP is a specific target which this government is committed to 
achieving over the coming years. It will require a major increase in funding 
both from the government and the financial sector. In this Budget, I 
propose to take concrete steps to do this, in three ways:  
 
44. Firstly, by creating the institutional structures; secondly, by a big 
thrust on monetizing assets, and thirdly by enhancing the share of capital 
expenditure in central and state budgets.  
 
 
Infrastructure financing - Development Financial Institution (DFI)  
 
45. Infrastructure needs long term debt financing. A professionally 
managed Development Financial Institution is necessary to act as a 
provider, enabler and catalyst for infrastructure financing. Accordingly, I 
shall introduce a Bill to set up a DFI. I have pr ovided a sum of `20,000 crores 
to capitalise this institution. The ambition is to have a lending portfolio of at 
least `5 lakh crores for this DFI in three years time.  
 9 
 
 
 46. Debt Financing of InVITs and REITs by Foreign Portfolio Investors will 
be enabled by ma king suitable amendments in the relevant legislations. This 
will further ease access of finance to InVITS and REITs thus augmenting 
funds for infrastructure and real estate sectors.  
 
Asset Monetisation  
 
47. Monetizing operating public infrastructure assets is a very important 
financing option for new infrastructure construction. A “National 
Monetization Pipeline”  of potential brownfield infrastructure assets will be 
launched.  An Asset Monetization dashboard will also be created for 
tracking the progress and to provide visibility to investors. Some important 
measures in the direction of monetisation are:  
 
a. National Highways Authority of India and PGCIL each have 
sponsored one InvIT  that will attract international and domestic 
institutional investors. Five operational roads with an estimated 
enterprise value of ` 5,000 crores are being transferred to the NHAI 
InvIT.  Similarily, transmission assets of a value of `7,000 crores will 
be transferred to the PGCIL InvIT.  
b. Railways will monetise Dedicated Freight Corridor assets for 
operations and maintenance, after commissioning.  
c. The next lot of Airports will be monetised for operations and 
management concession.  
d. Other core infrastructure assets that will be rolled out under the 
Asset Monetization Programme are: (i) NHAI Operational Toll Roads 
(ii) Transmission Assets of PGCIL (iii) Oil and Gas Pipelines of GAIL, 
IOCL and HPCL (iv) AAI Airports in Tier II and III c ities, (v) Other 
Railway Infrastructure Assets (vi) Warehousing Assets of CPSEs such 
as Central Warehousing Corporation and NAFED among others and 
(vii) Sports Stadiums.  
  
Sharp Increase in Capital Budget  
 
48. In the BE 2020 -21, we had provided `4.12 lakh cror es for Capital 
Expenditure. It was our effort that in spite of resource crunch we should 
spend more on capital and we are likely to end the year at around `4.39 10 
 
 
 lakh crores which I have provided in the RE 2020 -21.  For 2021 -22, I propose 
a sharp increase i n capital expenditure and thus have provided `5.54 lakh 
crores which is 34.5% more than the BE of 2020 -21.  Of this, I have kept a 
sum of more than `44,000 crores in the Budget head of the Department of 
Economic Affairs to be provided for projects/programm es/departments 
that show good progress on Capital Expenditure and are in need of further 
funds. Over and above this expenditure, we would also be providing more 
than `2 lakh crores to States and Autonomous Bodies for their Capital 
Expenditure.   
 
49. We will a lso work out specific mechanisms to nudge States to spend 
more of their budget on creation of infrastructure.  
 
Roads and Highways Infrastructure  
 
50. More than 13,000 km length of roads, at a cost of `3.3 lakh crores, 
has already been awarded under the `5.35 lakh crores Bharatmala 
Pariyojana project of which 3,800 kms have been constructed. By March 
2022, we would be awarding another 8,500 kms and complete an additional 
11,000 kms of national highway corridors.  
 
51. To further augment road infrastructure, mor e economic corridors 
are also being planned. Some are:  
 
a. 3,500 km of National Highway works in the state of Tamil Nadu at an 
investment of `1.03 lakh crores. These include Madurai -Kollam 
corridor, Chittoor -Thatchur corridor. Construction will start next 
year. 
b. 1,100 km of National Highway works in the State of Kerala at an 
investment of `65,000 crores including 600 km section of Mumbai -
Kanyakumari corridor in Kerala.  
c. 675 km of highway works in the state of West Bengal at a cost of 
`25,000 crores  including upgradation of existing road -Kolkata – 
Siliguri.  
d. National Highway works of around `19,000 crores  are currently in 
progress in the State of Assam. Further works of more than `34,000 11 
 
 
 crores covering more than 1300 kms of National Highways will be 
undertaken in the State in the coming three years.  
 
52. Some of the flagship corridors and other important projects that 
would see considerable activity in 2021 -22 are in Annexure -II.   
 
53. I am also providing an enhanced outlay of `1,18,101 lakh crores for 
Ministry of Roa d Transport and Highways, of which `1,08,230 crores is for 
capital, the highest ever.  
 
Railway Infrastructure  
 
54. Indian Railways have prepared a National Rail Plan for India – 2030. 
The Plan is to create a ‘future ready’ Railway system by 2030.  
 
55. Bringing down the logistic costs for our industry is at the core of our 
strategy to enable ‘Make in India’. It is expected that Western Dedicated 
Freight Corridor (DFC) and Eastern DFC will be commissioned by June 2022. 
The following additional initiatives are prop osed:  
 
a. The Sonnagar – Gomoh Section (263.7 km) of Eastern DFC will be 
taken up in PPP mode in 2021 -22. Gomoh -Dankuni section of 274.3 
km will also be taken up in short succession.  
b.  We will undertake future dedicated freight corridor projects namely 
East Co ast corridor from Kharagpur to Vijayawada, East -West 
Corridor from Bhusaval to Kharagpur to Dankuni and North -South 
corridor from Itarsi to Vijayawada. Detailed Project Reports will be 
undertaken in the first phase.    
c. Broad Gauge Route Kilometers (RKM) el ectrified is expected to reach 
46,000 RKM i.e., 72% by end of 2021 from 41,548 RKM on 1st Oct 
2020 . 100% electrification of Broad -Gauge routes will be completed 
by December, 2023.  
 
56. For Passenger convenience and safety the following measures are 
proposed:  12 
 
 
 a. We will introduce the aesthetically designed Vista Dome LHB coach 
on tourist routes to give a better travel experience to passengers.   
b. The safety measures undertaken in the past few years have borne 
results. To further strengthen this effort, high density  network and 
highly utilized network routes of Indian railways will be provided 
with an indigenously developed automatic train protection system  
that eliminates train collision due to human error.  
c. I am providing a record sum of `1,10,055 crores , for Railways of 
which `1,07,100 crores  is for capital expenditure.  
 
Urban Infrastructure  
57. We will work towards raising the share of public transport in urban 
areas through expansion of metro rail network and augmentation of city bus 
service. A new scheme will be launched at a cost of `18,000 crores  to 
support augmentation of public bus transport services. The scheme will 
facilitate deployment of innovative PPP models to enable private sector 
players to finance, acquire, operate and maintain over 20,000 buses.  The 
scheme will boost the automobile se ctor, provide fillip to economic growth, 
create employment opportunities for our youth and enhance ease of 
mobility for urban residents.  
 
58. A total of 702 km of conventional metro is operational and another 
1,016 km of metro and RRTS is under construction i n 27 cities. Two new 
technologies i.e., ‘MetroLite’ and ‘MetroNeo’ will be deployed to provide 
metro rail systems at much lesser cost with same experience, convenience 
and safety in Tier -2 cities and peripheral areas of Tier -1 cities.   
 
59. Central counterpar t funding will be provided to:  
a. Kochi Metro Railway Phase -II of 11.5 km at a cost of `1957.05 crores . 
b. Chennai Metro Railway Phase -II of 118.9 km at a cost of `63,246 
crores.   
c. Bengaluru Metro Railway Project Phase 2A and 2B of 58.19 km at a 
cost of `14,788 crores.  
d. Nagpur  Metro Rail Project Phase -II and Nashik Metro at a cost of 
`5,976 crores  and `2,092 crores  respectively.  
 13 
 
 
 Power Infrastructure  
 
60. The past 6 years have seen a number of reforms and achievements 
in the power sector.  We have added 139 Giga Watts of installed capacity, 
connected an additional 2.8 crores  households and added 1.41 lakh circuit 
km of transmission lines.  
 
61. The distribution  companies across the country are monopolies ,  
either government or private. There is a need to provide choice to 
consumers by promoting competition. A framework will be put in place to 
give consumers alternatives to choose from among more than one 
Distrib ution Company.  
 
62. The viability of Distribution Companies is a serious concern. A 
revamped reforms -based result -linked power distribution sector scheme 
will be launched with an outlay of `3,05,984 crores   over 5 years. The 
scheme will provide assistance to DISCOMS for Infrastructure creation 
including pre -paid smart metering and feeder separation, upgradation of 
systems, etc., tied to financial improvements.  
 
63. Prime Minister, while speaking at the 3rd Re-inVest Conference in 
November 2020, had announced plans  to launch a comprehensive National 
Hydrogen Energy Mission. It is now proposed to launch a  Hydrogen Energy 
Mission in  2021 -22 for generating hydrogen from green power sources.   
  
Ports, Shipping, Waterways  
 
64. Major Ports will be moving from managing their operational services 
on their own to a model where a private partner will manage it for them.  
For the purpose, 7 projects worth more than `2,000 crores  will be offered 
by the Major Ports on Public Private Partnership mode in FY21 -22.  
 
65. A scheme to promote  flagging of merchant ships in India  will be 
launched by providing subsidy support to Indian shipping companies in 
global tenders floated by Ministries and CPSEs. An amount of `1624 crores 
will be provided over 5 years. This initiative will enable greater training and 14 
 
 
 employment opportunities for Indian seafarers besides enhancing Indian 
companies share in global shipping.  
 
66. India has enacted Recycling of Ships Act, 2019 and acceded to the 
Hong Kong International Convention.  Around 90 ship recycling yards at 
Alang in Gujarat have already achieved HKC -compliant certificates. Efforts 
will be made to bring more ships to India fr om Europe and Japan. Recycling 
capacity of around 4.5 Million Light Displacement Tonne (LDT) will be 
doubled by 2024. This is expected to generate an additional 1.5 lakh jobs for 
our youth.  
 
Petroleum & Natural Gas  
 
67. Our government has kept fuel supplies r unning across the country 
without interruption during the COVID -19 lockdown period. Taking note of 
the crucial nature of this sector in people’s lives, the following key initiatives 
are being announced:  
 
a. Ujjwala Scheme which has benefited 8 crores  households will be 
extended to cover  1 crores  more beneficiaries . 
b. We will add 100 more districts in next 3 years to the City Gas 
Distribution network.   
c. A gas pipeline project will be taken up in Union Territory of Jammu & 
Kashmir.  
d. An independent Gas Transport System Operator will be set up for 
facilitation and coordination of booking of common carrier capacity 
in all -natural gas pipelines on a non -discriminatory open access 
basis.  
 
Financial Capital  
68. I propose to consolidate the pro visions of SEBI Act, 1992, 
Depositories Act, 1996, Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 and 
Government Securities Act, 2007 into a rationalized single Securities 
Markets Code .   
   
 15 
 
 
 69. The Government would support the development of a world class 
Fin-Tech hub at the GIFT -IFSC.  
 
70. To instill confidence amongst the participants in the Corporate Bond 
Market during times of stress and to generally enhance secondary market 
liquidity, it is proposed to create a permanent institutional framework.  The 
propo sed body would purchase investment grade debt securities both in 
stressed and normal times and help in the development of the Bond 
market.   
 
71. In the budget of 2018 -19, Government had announced its intent to 
establish a system of regulated gold exchanges in  the country. For the 
purpose, SEBI will be notified as the regulator and Warehousing 
Development and Regulatory Authority will be strengthened to set up a 
commodity market eco system arrangement including vaulting, assaying, 
logistics etc in addition to w arehousing.  
 
72. Towards investor protection, I propose to introduce an investor 
charter as a right of all financial investors across all financial products.  
 
73. To give a further boost to the non -conventional energy sector, I 
propose to provide additional capi tal infusion of `1,000 crores  to Solar 
Energy Corporation of India and `1,500 crores  to Indian Renewable Energy 
Development Agency.   
 
Increasing FDI in Insurance Sector  
 
74. I propose to amend the Insurance Act, 1938 to increase the 
permissible FDI  limit from 49% to 74% in Insurance Companies and allow 
foreign  ownership and control with safeguards . Under the new structure, 
the majority of Directors on the Board and key management persons would 
be resident Indians, with at least 50% of Directors being Independent 
Directors, and specified percentage of profits being retained as general 
reserve.  
 
Stres sed Asset Resolution by setting up a New Structure  
 
75. The high level of provisioning by public sector banks of their stressed 
assets calls for measures to clean up the bank books.  An Asset 16 
 
 
 Reconstruction Company Limited and Asset Management Company would 
be set up to consolidate and take over the existing  stressed debt and then 
manage and dispose of the assets to Alternate Investment Funds and other 
potential investors for eventual value realization.  
 
Recapitalization of PSBs  
 
76. To further consolidate the financial capacity of PSBs , further 
recapitalization of `20,000 crores  is proposed in 2021 -22. 
 
Deposit Insurance  
 
77. Last year, Government had approved an increase in the Deposit 
Insurance cover from `1 lakh to `5 lakhs for bank customers. I shall be 
moving amendments to the DICGC Act, 1961 in this Session itself to 
streamline the provisions, so that if a bank is temporarily unable to fulfil its 
obligations, the depositors of such a bank can get easy and time -boun d 
access to their deposits to the extent of the deposit insurance cover. This 
would help depositors of banks that are currently under stress.  
 
78. To improve credit discipline while continuing to protect the interest 
of small borrowers, for NBFCs with minimum asset size of `100 crores, the 
minimum loan size eligible for debt recovery under the Securitisation and 
Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest 
(SARFAESI) Act, 2002 is proposed to be reduced from the existing level of 
`50 lakhs to `20 lakhs.  
 
Company Matters  
 
79. The decriminalizing of the procedural and technical compoundable 
offences under the Companies Act, 2013, is now complete. I now propose 
to next take up decriminalization of the Limited Liability Partnership (LLP) 
Act, 2 008.  
 
80. Sir, I propose to revise the definition under the Companies Act, 2013 
for Small Companies by increasing their thresholds for Paid up capital from 
“not exceeding `50 Lakh” to “not exceeding `2 Crore” and turnover from 
“not exceeding `2 Crore ” to “not exceeding `20 C rore ”. This will benefit 17 
 
 
 more than two lakh companies in easing their compliance requirements.  
 
81. As a further measure which directly benefits Start -ups and 
Innovators, I propose to incentivize the incorporation of One Person 
Companies ( OPCs) by allowing OPCs to grow without any restrictions on 
paid up capital and turnover, allowing their conversion into any other type 
of company at any time, reducing the residency limit for an Indian citizen to 
set up an OPC from 182 days to 120 days and  also allow Non Resident 
Indians (NRIs) to incorporate OPCs in India.  
 
82. To ensure faster resolution of cases, NCLT framework will be 
strengthened, e -Courts system shall be implemented and alternate 
methods of debt resolution and special framework for MSMEs  shall be 
introduced.  
 
83. During the coming fiscal 2021 -22, we  will be launching  data 
analytics, artificial intelligence, machine learning driven MCA21 Version 3.0. 
This Version 3.0 will have additional modules for e -scrutiny, e -Adjudication, 
e-Consultation and Compliance Management.  
 
Disinvestment and Strategic Sale  
 
84. In spite of COVID -19, we have kept working towards strategic 
disinvestment. A number of transactions namely BPCL, Air India, Shipping 
Corporation of India, Container Corporation of India, IDBI  Bank, BEML, 
Pawan Hans, Neelachal Ispat Nigam limited among others would be 
completed in 2021 -22. Other than IDBI Bank, we propose to take up the 
privatization of two Public Sector Banks and one General Insurance 
company in the year 2021 -22.  This would r equire legislative amendments 
and I propose to introduce the amendments in this Session itself.  
 
85. In 2021 -22 we would also bring the IPO of LIC for which I am 
bringing the requisite amendments in this Session itself.   
 
86. In the AtmaNirbhar Package, I had ann ounced that we will come out 
with a policy of strategic disinvestment of public sector enterprises.  I am 
happy to inform the House that the Government has approved the said 
policy.  The policy provides a clear roadmap for disinvestment in all non -
strategi c and strategic sectors.  We have kept four areas that are strategic 18 
 
 
 where bare minimum CPSEs will be maintained and rest privatized. In the 
remaining sectors all CPSEs will be privatized. The main highlights of the 
policy are mentioned at Annexure -III. 
 
87. To fast forward the disinvestment policy, I am asking NITI to work 
out on the next list of Central Public Sector companies that would be taken 
up for strategic disinvestment.  
 
88. To similarly incentivise States to take to disinvestment of their Public 
Sector Companies, we will work out an incentive package of Central Funds 
for States.  
 
89. Idle assets will not contribute to AtmaNirbhar Bharat. The non -core 
assets largely consist of surplus land with government 
Ministries/Departments and Public Sector Enterprises. Monetizing of land 
can either be by way of direct sale or concession or by similar means. This 
requires special abilities and for this purpose, I propose to use a Special 
Purpose Vehicle in the form of a company that would carry out this activity.  
 
90. In orde r to ensure timely completion of closure of sick or loss 
making CPSEs, we will introduce a revised mechanism that will ensure 
timely closure of such units.  
 
91. I have estimated ` 1,75,000 crores as receipts from disinvestment  in 
BE 202 1-22. 
 
Government Financial Reforms  
 
92. Under the Treasury Single Account (TSA) System autonomous bodies 
directly draw funds from the Government’s account at the time of actual 
expenditure, saving interest costs. We will extend the TSA System for 
universal application from 202 1-22. 
 
93. On the recommendation of the Fifteenth Finance Commission, we 
have undertaken a detailed exercise to rationalise and bring down the 
number of Centra lly Sponsored Schemes. This will enable consolidation of 
outlays for better impact.  
 19 
 
 
 94. The Government i s committed to the development of Multi -State 
Cooperatives and will provide all support to them. To further streamline the 
‘Ease of Doing Business’ for Cooperatives, I propose to set up a separate 
Administrative Structure for them.  
 
3. Inclusive Development for Aspirational India  
 
95. Honourable Speaker Sir, under this pillar, I will cover Agriculture and 
Allied sectors, farmers’ welfare and rural India, migrant workers and labour, 
and financial inclusion.  
 
Agriculture  
 
96. Our Government is committed to the welfare of farmers.  The MSP 
regime has undergone a sea change to assure price that is at least 1.5 times 
the cost of production across all commodities. The procurement has also 
continued to increase at a steady pace.  This has resulted in increase in 
payment to farmers substantially.  
 
97. In case of wheat, the total amount paid to farmers in 2013 -2014 was 
`33,874 crores. In 2019 -2020 it was `62,802 crores , and even better, in 
2020 -2021, this amount, paid to farmers, was `75,060 crores.  The number 
of wheat  growing farmers that were benefitted increased in 2020 -21 to 
43.36 lakhs as compared to 35.57 lakhs in 2019 -20. 
 
98. For paddy, the amount paid in 2013 -14 was `63,928 crores. In 2019 -
2020 this increased `1,41,930 crores . Even better, in 2020 -2021, this is 
further estimated to increase to `172,752 crores.  The number of farmers 
benefitted increased from 1.24 crores in 2019 -20 to 1.54 crores in 2020 -21.   
 
99. In the same vein, in case of pulses, the amount paid in 2013 -2014 
was `236 crores. In 2019 -20 it increased `8,285 crores. Now, in 2020 -2021, 
it is at `10,530 crores, a more than 40 times increase from 2013 -14.  
 
100. The receipts to cotton farmers have seen a stupendous increase 
from `90 crores  in 2013 -14 to `25,974 crores  (as on 27th January 2021).  
The details are in Annexure IV.  
 20 
 
 
 101. Early this year, Honourable Prime Minister had launched SWAMITVA 
Scheme. Under this, a record of rights is being given to property owners in 
villages. Up till now, about 1.80 lakh property -owne rs in 1,241 villages have 
been provided cards. I now propose during FY21 -22 to extend this to cover 
all states/UTs.  
 
102. To provide adequate credit to our farmers, I have enhanced the 
agricultural credit target to `16.5 lakh crores in FY22. We will focus on 
ensuring increased credit flows to animal husbandry, dairy, and fisheries.  
 
103. We are enhancing the allocation to the Rural Infrastructure 
Development Fund from `30,000 crores to `40,000 crores.  
 
104. The Micro Irrigation Fund, with a corpus of `5,000 crores has be en 
created under NABARD, I propose to double it by augmenting it by another 
`5,000 crores.  
 
105. To boost value addition in agriculture and allied products and their 
exports, the scope of ‘Operation Green Scheme’ that is presently applicable 
to tomatoes, onions, and potatoes, will be enlarged to include 22 perishable 
products.  
 
106. Around 1.68 crores  farmers are registered and ` 1.14 lakh crores  of 
trade value has been carried out through e -NAMs. Keeping in view the 
transparency and competitiveness that e -NAM has brought into the 
agricultural market, 1,000 more mandis will be integrated with e -NAM.  
  
107. The Agriculture Infrastructure Fund  would be made available to 
APMCs for augmenting their infrastructure facilities.  
 
Fisheries  
 
108. I am proposing substantial investments in the development of 
modern fishing harbours and fish landing centres. To start with, 5 maj or 
fishing harbours – Kochi, Chennai, Visakhapatnam, Paradip, and Petuaghat – 
will be developed as hubs of economic activity. We will also develop inland 
fishing harbours and fish -landing centres along the banks of rivers and 
waterways.  
 21 
 
 
 109. Seaweed farming i s an emerging sector with potential to transform 
the lives of coastal communities .  It will provide large scale employment and 
additional incomes. To promote seaweed cultivation, I propose a 
Multipurpose Seaweed Park to be established in Tamil Nadu.  
 
Migr ant Workers and Labourers  
 
110. We have launched the One Nation One Ration Card scheme through 
which beneficiaries can claim their rations anywhere in the country . 
Migrant workers in particular benefit from this scheme – those staying away 
from their families can partially claim their ration where they are stationed, 
while their family, in their native places, can claim the rest. I  am happy to 
inform you that One Nation One Ration Card plan is under implementation 
by 32 states and UTs, reaching about 69 crores  beneficiaries – that’s a total 
of 86% beneficiaries covered. The remaining 4 states and UTs will be 
integrated in the next few months.  
 
111. To further extend our efforts toward s the unorganised labour force  
migrant workers particularly,  I propose to launch a portal that will collect 
relevant information on gig, building, and construction -workers among 
others. This will help formulate Health, Housing, Skill, Insurance, Credit, and 
food schemes for migrant workers.  
 
112. We will conclude a proc ess that began 20 years ago, with the 
implementation of the 4 labour codes. For the first time globally, social 
security benefits will extend to gig and platform workers. Minimum wages 
will apply to all categories of workers, and they will all be covered b y the 
Employees State Insurance Corporation. Women will be allowed to work in 
all categories and also in the night -shifts with adequate protection. At the 
same time, compliance burden on employers will be reduced with single 
registration and licensing, and  online returns.  
 
Financial Inclusion  
 
113. To further facilitate credit flow under the scheme of Stand Up India 
for SCs, STs, and women, I propose to reduce the margin money 
requirement from 25% to 15%, and to also include loans for activities allied 
to agricu lture.  22 
 
 
  
114. We have taken a number of steps to support the MSME sector. In 
this Budget, I have provided `15,700 crores to this sector , more than double 
of this year’s BE.  
 
4. Reinvigorating Human Capital  
 
115. The National Education Policy (NEP) announced recently  has had 
good reception.  
 
School Education  
 
116. More than 15,000 schools will be qualitatively strengthened to 
include all components of the National Education Policy. They shall emerge 
as exemplar schools in their regions, handholding and mentoring other 
scho ols to achieve the ideals of the Policy.  
 
117. 100 new Sainik Schools will be set up in partnership with NGOs/  
private schools/states.  
 
Higher Education  
 
118. In Budget 2019 -20, I had mentioned about the setting -up of Higher 
Education Commission of India. We would be introducing Legislation this 
year to implement the same. It will be an umbrella body having 4 separate 
vehicles for standard -setting, accreditation , regulation, and funding.  
 
119. Many of our cities have various research institutions, universities, 
and colleges supported by the Government of India. Hyderabad for 
example, has about 40 such major institutions. In 9 such cities, we will 
create formal umbrel la structures so that these institutions can have better 
synergy, while also retaining their internal autonomy. A Glue Grant will be 
set aside for this purpose.  
 
120. For accessible higher education in Ladakh, I propose to set up a 
Central University in Leh.  
 
121. The other important projects to be taken up as part o f NEP are listed 
at Annexure V . 23 
 
 
  
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Welfare  
 
122. We have set ourselves a target of establishing 750 Eklavya model 
residential schools in our tribal areas. I propose to incr ease the unit cost of 
each such school from `20 crores to `38 crores, and for hilly and difficult 
areas, to `48 crores. This would help in creating robust infrastructure 
facilities for our tribal students.  
 
123. We have revamped the Post Matric Scholarship Scheme, for the 
welfare of Scheduled Castes. I  have also enhanced the Central Assistance in 
this regard . We are allotting ` 35,219 crores for 6 years till 2025 -2026, to 
benefit 4 crores  SC students.  
 
Skilling  
 
124. In 2016, we had launched the National Apprenti ceship Promotion 
Scheme. The Government proposes to amend the Apprenticeship Act with a 
view to further enhancing apprenticeship opportunities for our youth. We 
will realign the existing scheme of National Apprenticeship Training Scheme 
(NATS) for providin g post -education apprenticeship, training of graduates 
and diploma holders in Engineering. Over `3,000 crores will be provided for 
this.  
 
125. An initiative is underway, in partnership with the United Arab 
Emirates (UAE), to benchmark skill qualifications, ass essment, and 
certification, accompanied by the deployment of certified workforce. We 
also have a collaborative Training Inter Training Programme (TITP) between 
India and Japan to facilitate transfer of Japanese industrial and vocational 
skills, technique, and knowledge.  We will take forward this initiative with 
many more countries.  
 
5. Innovation and R&D  
 
126. In my Budget Speech of July 2019, I had announced the National 
Research Foundation. We have now worked out the modalities  and the NRF 
outlay will be of `50,000 crores, over 5 years. It will ensure that the overall 24 
 
 
 research ecosystem of the country is strengthened with focus on identified 
national -priority thrust areas.  
 
127. There has been a manifold increase in digital payments in the recent 
past. To give a fu rther boost to digital transactions, I earmark `1,500 crores 
for a proposed scheme that will provide financial incentive to promote 
digital modes of payment.  
 
128. We will undertake a new initiative – National Language Translation 
Mission (NTLM). This will enab le the wealth of governance -and-policy 
related knowledge on the Internet being made available in major Indian 
languages.  
 
129. The New Space India Limited (NSIL), a PSU under the Department of 
Space will execute the PSLV -CS51 launch, carrying the Amazonia Sate llite 
from Brazil, along with a few smaller Indian satellites.  
 
130. As part of the Gaganyaan mission activities, four Indian astronauts 
are being trained on Generic Space Flight aspects, in Russia. The first 
unmanned launch is slated for December 2021.  
 
131. Our oc eans are a storehouse of living and non -living resources. To 
better understand this realm, we will launch a Deep Ocean Mission with a 
budget outlay of more than `4,000 crores , over five years. This Mission will 
cover deep ocean survey exploration and proje cts for the conservation of 
deep sea bio -diversity.  
 
6.  Minimum Government, Maximum Governance  
132. Speaker Sir, I now come to the last of the six pillars. This will outline 
plans for reforms in one of our core principles of minimum gover nment , 
maximum govern ance.  
 
133. We have taken a number of steps to bring reforms in Tribunals in 
the last few years for speedy delivery of justice. Continuing with the 
reforms process, I now  propose to take  further measures to rationalize the 
functioning of Tribunals.  
 
134. We have introduced the National Commission for Allied Healthcare 
Professionals Bill in Parliament, with a view to ensure transparent and 25 
 
 
 efficient regulation of the 56 allied healthcare professions. Additionally, to 
bring about transparency, efficiency and  governance reforms in the nursing 
profession, The National Nursing and Midwifery Commission Bill will be 
introduced by the government for passing.  
 
135. To have ease of doing business for those who deal with Government 
or CPSEs, and carry out contracts, I prop ose to set up a Conciliation 
Mechanism and mandate its use for quick resolution of contractual 
disputes. This will instil confidence in private investors and contractors.  
 
136. The forthcoming Census could be the first digital census in the 
history of India. Fo r this monumental and milestone -marking task, I have 
allocated `3,76 8 crores  in the year 2021 -2022.  
 
137. Goa is celebrating the diamond jubilee year of the state’s liberation 
from Portuguese rule. From the GoI’s side, I propose a grant of `300 crores 
to the Go vernment of Goa for the celebrations.  
 
138. I propose to provide `1,000 crores for the welfare of Tea workers 
especially women and their children in Assam and West Bengal. A special 
scheme will be devised for the same.  
 
 
Fiscal Position  
 
139. In these last few paragraphs of Part A of my speech, I draw the 
attention of this august House to the fact that, at the beginning of the 
current Financial Year, the pandemic’s impact on the economy resulted in a 
weak revenue inflow. This was combined with high expenditure t o provide 
essential relief to vulnerable sections of the society especially the poor, 
women, SCs and STs.  
 
140.  Unlike many other countries, we opted for a series of medium -sized 
packages during the pandemic so that we could calibrate and target our 
response a ccording to an evolving situation. Once the health situation 
stabilised, and the lockdown was being slowly lifted, we switched to 
ramping up Government spending so as to revive domestic demand. As a 
result, against an original BE expenditure of `30.42 lakh  crores for 2020 -
2021, our RE estimates are `34.50 lakh crores. We have maintained the 26 
 
 
 quality of expenditure. The capital expenditure, estimated in RE is ` 4.39 
lakh crores in 2020 -2021 as against `4.12 lakh crores in B E 2020 -21. 
 
141. The fiscal deficit in RE  2020 -21 is pegged at 9.5%  of GDP . We have 
funded this through Government borrowings, multilateral borrowings, Small 
Saving Funds and short term borrowings. We would need another ` 80,000 
crores  for which we would be approaching the markets in these 2 months. 
To ensure that the economy is given the required push, our BE estimates for 
expenditure in 2021 -2022, are `34.83  lakh crores. This includes ` 5.54 lakh 
crores as capital expenditure, an incr ease of  34.5 % over the BE figure of 
2020 -2021. The fiscal deficit in BE 2021 -2022 is estimated to be 6.8% of 
GDP.  The gross borrowing from the market for the next year would be 
around `12 lakh crores. We plan to continue with our path of fiscal 
consolidati on, and intend to reach a fiscal deficit level below 4.5% of GDP by 
2025 -2026 with a fairly steady decline over the period. We hope to achieve 
the consolidation by first, increasing the buoyancy of tax revenue through 
improved compliance, and secondly , by increased receipts from 
monetisation of assets, including Public Sector Enterprises and land.  The 
Contingency Fund of India is being proposed to be augmented from `500 
crores  to `30,000 crores  through Finance Bill.  
  
 
142. In accordance with the views of the 15th Finance Commission, we 
are allowing a normal ceiling of net borrowing for the states at 4% of GSDP 
for the year 2021 -2022. A portion of this ceiling will be earmarked to be 
spent on incremental capital expenditure. Additional borrowing ceiling of 
0.5% o f GSDP will also be provided subject to conditions. States will be 
expected to reach a fiscal deficit of 3% of GSDP by 2023 -24, as 
recommended by the 15th Finance Commission.  
 
143.  In the July 2019 -2020 Budget, I introduced the Statement 27 on 
Extra Budgetary Resources – it disclosed the borrowings of Government 
agencies that went towards funding GoI schemes, and whose repayment 
burden was on the Government. In my 2020 -2021 Budget, I enhanced the 
scope and coverage of the Statement, by including the loans provi ded by 
Government to the FCI. Taking a step further in this direction , I   propose  to 
discontinue the NSSF Loan to FCI for Food Subsidy and accordingly Budget 
Provisions have been made in RE 2020-21 and BE 2021 -22. The Extra 
Budgetary Resources details are  at Annexure VI.  27 
 
 
 144. We know that the FRBM Act mandates fiscal deficit of 3% of GDP to 
be achieved by 31st March 2020 -2021. The effect of this year’s unforeseen 
and unprecedented circumstances has necessitated the submission of a 
deviation statement under Sect ions 4 (5) and 7 (3) (b) of the FRBM Act 
which I am laying on the Table of the House as part of the FRBM 
Documents.  
 
145. Towards achieving Central Government fiscal deficit along the broad 
path that I have already indicated; I will be introducing an amendment to 
the FRBM Act.  
 
146. On 9th December 2020, the 15th Finance Commission submitted its 
final report, covering the period 2021 -2026 to the Rashtrapati ji. The 
Government has laid the Commission’s report, along with the explanatory 
memorandum in the Parliament retaining the vertical shares of the states at 
41%. We recognise our commitment to fiscal federalism and propose 
therefore to adhere to this recommendation. Jammu and Kashmir in the 
14th Finance Commission was entitled to get devolution being a State. Now,  
the funds to the UTs of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh would be provided 
by the Centre.  I have also provided, on the Commission’s recommendation, 
`1,18,452 crores as Revenue Deficit Grant to 17 states in 2021 -2022, as 
against `74,340 crores to  14 S tates in 2020 -2021.  
 
I would, now, move to Part B of my speech.  28 
 
PART B  
147. Honourable Speaker, the world is facing a serious challenge of the 
pandemic and its aftershock. In these trying times, when many economies 
are struggling to revive, our people and our industry have exhibited 
remarkable resilience.  
 
148. As I mentioned already, post -pandemic, a new world order seems to 
be emerging, one in which Asia is poised to occupy a prominent position 
and India will have a leading role therein.  In this scenario, our tax system 
has to be transparent, efficient, and sh ould promote investments and 
employment in our country. At the same time it should put minimum 
burden on our tax payers.  
 
இயற´ ஈyட´u கா{த´ கா{த  
வ{த´ வல தர.  
- தி¯tற   385 
 
A King/Ruler is the one who creates and acquires wealth, 
protects and distributes it for common good.  
- Thirukkural 385  
 
Direct Tax Proposals  
149. Keeping this in mind, our Government introduced a series of reforms 
in the Direct tax system for the benefit of our taxpayers and economy.  Few 
months prior to the pandemic,   in order to attract investments  we slashed 
our Corporate tax rate to make it among the lowest in the world. The 
Dividend Distribution Tax too was abolished. The burden of taxation on 
small taxpayers was eased by increasing rebates. In 2020, the return f ilers 
saw a dramatic increase to  6.48 crore from  3.31 crore in 2014.  
 
150. In the Direct Tax administration, we had recently introduced the 
Faceless Assessment and Faceless Appeal. I now seek to take further steps 
to simplify the tax administration, ease compliance, and reduce litigation.  
 29 
 
Relief to Senior Citizens  
151. I begin my direct tax proposals by offering my pranaam  to our senior 
citizens. Many of them, despite having foregone several basic necessities of 
their own, have strived to build our nation.  
 
152. Now in the 75th year of Independence of our country, when we 
continue our  endeavour with renewed vigour, we shall reduce compliance 
burden on our senior citizens who are 75 years of age and above. For senior 
citizens who only have pension and interest incom e, I propose exemption 
from filing their income tax returns. The paying bank will deduct the 
necessary tax on their income.   
 
Reduction in Time for Income Tax Proceedings  
153. Honourable Speaker, presently, an assessment can be re -opened up 
to 6 years and in serious tax fraud cases for up to 10 years. As a result, 
taxpayers have to remain under uncertainty for a long time.  
 
154. I therefore propose to reduce this time -limit for re -opening of 
assessment to 3 years from the present 6 years. In serious tax evasion cases 
too, only where there is evidence of concealment of income of  `50 lakh or 
more in a year, can the assessment be re -opened up to 10 years. Even this 
reopening can be don e only after the approval of the Principal Chief 
Commissioner, the highest level of the Income Tax Department.  
 
Setting up the Dispute Resolution Committee  
155. Honourable Speaker, it has been the resolve of this Government to 
reduce litigation, which mars the  present taxation system.   
 
156. The Government came out with the Direct Tax Vivad Se Vishwas 
Scheme to give taxpayers an opportunity to settle long pending disputes 
and be relieved of further strain on their time and resources. The response  
from the taxpayer s has been the best ever as  over 1 lakh ten thousand  
taxpayers have already opted to settle tax disputes of over  `85,000 crores  
under this Scheme.  
 
 30 
 
157. To further reduce litigation for small taxpayers, I propose to 
constitute a Dispute Resolution Committee  for them , which will be faceless 
to ensure efficiency, transparency and accountability. Anyone with a taxable 
income up to  `50 lakh and disputed income up to  `10 lakh shall be eligible 
to approach the Committee.  
 
Faceless ITAT  
158. For ease of compliance and to reduce discretion, we  are committed 
to make the taxation processes faceless . The Government has already 
introduced faceless assessment and appeal this year.  
 
159. The next level of income tax appeal is the Income Tax Appellate 
Tribunal.  I now propose to make this Tribunal faceless. We shall establish a 
National Faceless Income Tax Appellate Tribunal Centre. All communication 
between the Tribunal and the appellant shall be electronic. Where personal 
hearing is needed, it shall be d one through video -conferencing.  
 
Relaxation to NRI  
160. When Non -Resident Indians return to India, they have issues with 
respect to their accrued incomes in their foreign retirement accounts. This 
is usually due to a mismatch in taxation periods.  They also f ace difficulties 
in getting credit for Indian taxes in foreign jurisdictions. I propose t o notify 
rules for removing their  hardship of double taxation.  
 
Exemption from Audit  
161. Currently, if your turnover exceeds  `1 crore, you have to get your 
accounts audi ted. In the February 2020 Budget, I had increased the limit for 
tax audit to  `5 crore for those who carry out 95% of their transactions 
digitally. To further incentivise digital transactions and reduce compliance 
burden, I propose to increase this limit f or tax audit for such persons from  
`5 crore to  `10 crore.  
Relief for Dividend  
162. In the previous Budget, I had abolished the Dividend Distribution Tax 
(DDT) in order to incentivise investment. Dividend was made taxable in the 31 
 
hands of shareholders. Now, in order to provide ease of compliance, I 
propose to make dividend payment to REIT/ InvIT exempt from TDS. 
Further, as the amount of dividend income cannot be estimated correctly 
by the shareholders for paying advance tax, I propose to provide that 
advance ta x liability on dividend income shall arise only after the 
declaration/payment of dividend. Also, for Foreign Portfolio Investors, I 
propose to enable deduction of tax on dividend income at lower treaty rate.  
Attracting foreign investment into infrastructu re sector  
163. In the last budget, for attracting foreign investment in the 
infrastructure sector, we had granted 100% tax exemption, subject to 
certain conditions, to foreign Sovereign Wealth Funds and Pension Funds, 
on their income from investment in Indian i nfras tructure. We have noticed 
that few of such Funds are facing difficulties in meeting some of these 
conditions. In order to ensure that a large number of Funds invest in India, I 
propose to relax some of these conditions relating to prohibition on priva te 
funding, restriction on commercial activities, and direct investment in 
infrastructure.     
 
164. In order to allow funding of infrastructure by issue of Zero Coupon 
Bonds, I propose to make notified Infrastructure Debt Funds eligible to raise 
funds by issui ng tax efficient Zero Coupon Bonds.  
 
Affordable Housing/Rental Housing  
165. This Government sees ‘Housing for All’ and affordable housing as 
priority areas. In the July 2019 Budget , I provided an additional deduction of 
interest, amounting to  `1.5 lakh, for loan taken to purchase an affordable 
house. I propose to extend the eligibility of this deduction by one more 
year, to 31st March 2022. The additional deduction of  `1.5 lakh shall 
therefore be available for loans taken up till 31st March 202 2, for the 
purchase of an affordable house.  
 
166. Further, to keep up the supply of affordable houses, I propose that 
affordable housing projects can avail a tax holiday for one more year – till 
31st March, 2022.  
 32 
 
167. We are committed to promote supply of Affordable Rental Housing 
for migrant workers. For this, I propose to allow  tax exemption for notified 
Affordable Rental Housing Projects.  
 
Tax incentives to IFSC  
168. As I mentioned in Part A of this speech, the Government is 
committed t o make the International Financial Services Centre (IFSC) in GIFT 
City a global financial hub. In addition to the tax incentives already 
provided, I propose to include, among others, tax holiday for capital gains 
for aircraft leasing companies, tax exempti on for aircraft lease rentals paid 
to foreign lessors; tax incentive for relocating foreign funds in the IFSC; and 
to  allow tax exemption to the investment division of foreign banks located 
in IFSC.  
Pre-filling of Returns  
169. Honourable Speaker, in order to ease compliance for the taxpayer, 
details of salary income, tax payments, TDS, etc. already come pre -filled in  
income tax  returns. To further ease filing of returns, details of capital gains 
from listed securities, dividend income, and interest from banks,  post office, 
etc. will also be pre -filled.  
 
Relief to Small Trusts  
170. We hope to reduce compliance burden on small  charitable trusts 
running  educational institutions and hospitals. So far, there is a blanket 
exemption to such entities, whose annual receipt  does not exceed   
`1 crore. I now propose to increase this amount to  `5 crore.  
 
Labour Welfare  
171. We have noticed that some employers deduct the contribution of 
employees towards  Provident  funds, superannuation funds,  and other 
social security funds but do not deposit these contributions within the 
specified time. For the employees, this means a loss of interest or income. 
In cases where an employer later becomes financial ly unviable, non -deposit 
results in a permanent loss for the employees.  33 
 
172. In order to ensure that employees’ contributions are deposited on 
time, I reiterate that the late deposit of employee’s contribution by the 
employer will not be allowed as deduction to the employer.  
 
Incentives for Start -ups 
173. In order to incentivise  start -ups in the country, I propose to extend 
the eligibility for claiming tax holiday for start -ups by one more year - till 
31st March, 2022. Further, in order to incentivise funding of the start -ups, I 
propose to extend the capital gains exemption for investment in start -ups 
by one more year - till 31st March, 2022.  
Indirect Tax Proposals  
GST  
174. Before I come to my Indirect Tax proposals, I would like to appraise 
the House on GST. The GST is now four years ol d, and we have taken several 
measures to further simplify it. Some of the measures include:  
i. nil return through SMS,  
ii. quarterly return and monthly payment for small taxpayers,  
iii. electronic invoice system,  
iv. validated input tax statement,  
v. pre-filled editable GST return, and  
vi. staggering of returns filing.  
The capacity of GSTN system has also been enhanced.  We have also 
deployed deep analytics and Artificial Intelligence to identi fy tax evaders 
and fake billers and launch ed special drives against them.  
175. The re sults speak for themselves. We have made record collections 
in the last few months.  
 
176. The GST  Council has painstakingly thrashed out thorny issues. As 
Chairperson of the Council, I want to assure the House that we shall take 
every possible measure to smoothen the GST further, and remove 
anomalies such as the inverted duty structure.  
 
Custom Duty R ationalization  
177. Our Custom Duty Policy should have the twin objective of promoting 
domestic manufacturing and helping India get onto global value chain and 34 
 
export better. The thrust now has to be on easy access to raw materials and 
exports of value added pr oducts.  
 
178. Towards this, last year, we started overhauling the Customs Duty 
structure, eliminating 80 outdated exemptions.  I also thank everyone who 
responded overwhelmingly to a crowd -sourcing call for suggestions on this 
revamp. I now propose to review mo re than 400 old exemptions this year.  
We will conduct this through extensive consultations, and from 1st October 
2021, we will put in place a revised customs duty structure, free of 
distortions. I also propose that any new customs duty exemption 
hencefort h will have validity up to the 31st March following two years from 
the date of its issue.  
 
Electronic and Mobile Phone Industry  
179. Domestic electronic manufacturing has grown rapidly. We are now 
exporting items like mobiles and chargers. For greater domestic value 
addition, we are withdrawing a few exemptions on parts of chargers and 
sub-parts of mobiles. Further, some parts of mobiles will move from ‘nil’ 
rate to a moderate 2.5%.  
 
Iron and Steel  
180. MSMEs  and other user industries have been severely hit by a recent 
sharp rise in iron and steel prices.  Therefore, we are reducing Customs duty 
uniformly to 7.5% on semis, flat, and long products of non -alloy, alloy, and 
stainless steels. To provide relief to metal re -cyclers, mostly MSMEs, I am 
exempting duty on steel scrap for a period up to 31st March, 2022.  Further, 
I am also revoking ADD and CVD on certain steel products. Also, to provide 
relief to copper recyclers, I am reducing duty on copper scrap from  5% to 
2.5%.  
 
Textile  
181. The Textiles Sector generates employment and contributes 
significantly to the economy. There is a need to rationalize duties on raw 
material inputs to manmade textiles.  We are now bringing nylon chain on 
par with polyester and other man -made fibers. We are uniformly reducing 35 
 
the BCD rates on caprolactam, nylon chips and nylon fiber & yarn to 5%. 
This will help the textile industry, MSMEs, and exports, too.  
 
Chemicals  
182. We have calibrated customs duty rates on chemicals to encourage 
dom estic value addition and to remove inversions.  Apart from other items, 
we are reducing customs duty on Naptha to 2.5% to correct inversion.  
Gold and Silver  
183. Gold and silver presently attract a basic customs duty of 12.5%. 
Since the duty was raised from 10%  in July 2019, prices of precious metals 
have risen sharply. To bring it closer to previous levels, we are rationalizing 
custom duty on gold and silver.  
 
Renewable Energy  
184. In Part A, we have already acknowledged that solar energy has huge 
promise for India . To build up domestic capacity, we will notify a phased 
manufacturing plan for solar cells and solar panels. At present, to encourage 
domestic production, we are raising duty on solar invertors from 5% to 20%, 
and on solar lanterns from 5% to 15%.  
 
Capita l Equipment  and Auto Parts  
185. There is immense potential in manufacturing heavy capital 
equipment domestically. We will comprehensively review the rate structure 
in due course. However, we are revising duty rates on certain items 
immediately.  We propose to w ithdraw exemptions on tunnel boring 
machine. It will attract a customs duty of 7.5%; and its parts a duty of 2.5%. 
We are raising customs duty on certain auto parts to 15% to bring them on 
par with general rate on auto parts.  
MSME Products  
186. We are proposin g certain changes to benefit MSMEs. We are 
increasing duty from 10% to 15% on steel screws and plastic builder wares. 
On prawn feed we increase it from 5% to 15%. We are rationalizing 
exemption on import of duty -free items as an incentive to exporters of 36 
 
garments, leather, and handicraft items. Almost all these items are made 
domestically by our MSMEs. We are withdrawing exemption on imports of 
certain kind of leathers as they are domestically produced in good quantity 
and quality, mostly by MSMEs. We are a lso raising customs duty on finished 
synthetic gem stones to encourage their domestic processing.  
 
Agriculture Products  
187. To benefit farmers, we are raising customs duty on cotton from nil 
to 10% and on raw silk and silk yarn from 10% to 15%. We are also 
withdrawing end -use based concession on denatured ethyl alcohol. 
Currently, rates are being uniformly calibrated to 15% on items like maize 
bran, rice bran oil cake, and animal feed additives.  
 
188.  There is an immediate need to improve agricultural infrastruc ture 
so that we produce more, while also conserving and processing agricultural 
output efficiently. This will ensure enhanced remuneration for our farmers. 
To earmark resources for this purpose, I propose an Agriculture 
Infrastructure and Development Cess (AIDC) on a small number of items. 
However, while applying this cess, we have taken care not to put additional 
burden on consumers on most items.  
 
Rationalization of Procedures and Easing of Compliance  
189. For their judicious application, we propose certain changes in the 
provisions relating to ADD and CVD levies. To complete Customs 
investigations, we are prescribing definite timelines. In 2020, we rolled out 
the Turant Customs initiative, which brought in Faceless, Paperless, and 
Contactless Customs measures. With effect from September 2020, we  have 
implemented a new procedure for administration of Rules of Origin. This 
has helped in putting a check on misuse of FTAs.  
 
190. The specific details of direct and  in direct tax changes proposed are 
listed in the Annexure to my speech.  
 
191. Mr. Speaker Sir, with these words I commend the Budget to this 
august House.  
 37 
 
Annex to Part A of Budget Speech  
ANNEXURE -I 
Health and Wellbeing – Expenditure  
(In  ` crores) 
Ministry/Department  Actuals 
2019 -20 BE  
2020 -21 BE  
2021 -22 
D/o Health & Family Welfare  62,397  65,012  71,269  
D/o Health Research  1,934  2,100  2,663  
M/o AYUSH  1,784  2,122  2,970  
CoVID related Special Provisions        
Vaccination      35,000  
D/o Drinking Water & Sanitation  18,264  21,518  60,030  
Nutrition  1,880  3,700  2,700  
FC Grants for Water and Sanitation      36,022  
FC Grants for Health      13,192  
TOTAL  86,259  94,452  2,23,846  
 
 
  38 
 
ANNEXURE -II 
Flagship Projects: Roads and Highways  
Major Expressways/Corridors  
 Delhi -Mumbai Expressway: Remaining 260 km will be awarded 
before 31.3.2021.  
 Bengaluru – Chennai Expressway: 278 km will be initiated in the 
current financial year. Construction will begin in 2021 -22 
 Delhi -Dehradun economic corridor: 210 km corridor will be 
initiated in the current financial year. Construction will begin in 
2021 -22 
 Kanpur -Lucknow Expressway:  63 km expressway providing an 
alternate route to NH 27 will be initiated in 2021 -22.  
 Chennai – Salem corridor: 277 km expressway will be awarded 
and construction would start in 2021 -22.  
 Raipur -Vishakhapatnam: 464 km passing t hrough Chhattisgarh, 
Odisha and North Andhra Pradesh will be awarded in the current 
year. Construction will start in 2021 -22. 
 Amritsar -Jamnagar: Construction will commence in 2021 -22 
 Delhi –Katra: Construction will commence in 2021 -22 
Advanced Traffic mana gement system  with speed radars, variable message 
signboards, GPS enabled recovery vans will be installed in all new four and 
six lane highways.  
 
  39 
 
ANNEXURE -III 
Highlights of Disinvestment/Strategic Disinvestment Policy  
Objectives  
a) Minimising presence of  Central Government Public Sector Enterprises 
including financial institutions and creating new investment space for 
private sector  
b) Post disinvestment, economic growth of Central Public Sector 
Enterprises (CPSEs)/ financial institutions will be through inf usion of 
private capital, technology and best management practices. Will 
contribute to economic growth and new jobs.  
c) Disinvestment proceeds to finance various social sector and 
developmental programmes of the government.  
 
Policy features  
a) Policy covers existing CPSEs, Public Sector Banks and Public Sector 
Insurance Companies.  
b) Various sectors will be classified as strategic and non -strategic 
sectors.  
c) The strategic sectors classified are:  
i) Atomic energy, Space and Defence  
ii) Transport and Tel ecommunications  
iii) Power, Petroleum, Coal and other minerals  
iv) Banking, Insurance and financial services  
d) In strategic sectors, there will be bare minimum presence of the 
public sector enterprises. The remaining CPSEs in the strategic 
sector will be privatise d or merged or subsidiarized with other 
CPSEs or closed.  
e) In non -strategic sectors, CPSEs will be privatised, otherwise shall be 
closed.  
 
 
 
 40 
 
ANNEXURE -IV 
MSP Purchases of Agricultural Commodities  
 
Year  Wheat  Paddy  Cotton  Jute Pulses  Oilseeds 
and 
Copra  
MSP 
Value  
(` crore)  Number 
of 
farmers 
benefited 
(lakhs)  MSP 
Value  
(` crore)  Number of 
farmers 
benefited 
(lakhs)  MSP  
Value  
(` crore)  Number 
of 
famers 
benefited 
(lakhs)  MSP 
Value  
(` crore)  Number 
of 
farmers 
benefited 
(lakhs)  MSP Value 
(` crore)  MSP 
Value  
(` lakh)  
2010 -11 24764.3  NA 52573.04  NA - - - - 1.75 149.03  
2011 -12 33152  NA 58084.48  NA 14 0.02 47.7 0.46 0.005  1.52 
2012 -13 49020.18  NA 65039.28  NA 4797  7.3 140.19  1.15 407.22  394.06  
2013 -14 33874.20  NA 63927.65  NA 90 0.14 53.98.  0.5 235.86  1626.39  
2014 -15 39232.20  NA 66948.00  NA 18506  29.5 6.56 0.06 1128.93  45.52  
2015 -16 40727.60  NA 73981.90  73.08  1825  1.91 - - - 15.90  
2016 -17 35015.53  20.47  85802.73  76.85  - - 28.79  0.17 1039.39.  946.71  
2017 -18 50089.00  31.87  90397.86  72.31  898 0.88 172.16  1.22 8566.13  5072.73  
2018 -19 6204.33  38.77  116839.47  96.94  2976  2.38 66.79  0.26 20145.60  7091.11  
2019 -20 62802.88  35.57  141928.08  124.59  28500  21.5 56.24  0.55 8284.45  8305.06  
2020 -21 75059.60  43.36  172752**  154**  25974*  18.26*  2.99 0.01 10530.20  3647.11  
* upto 27.01.21; **Estimated value          
NA= Not Available   41 
 
ANNEXURE -V 
Initiatives on Education as part of NEP  
 Standards will be developed for all school teachers in the form of 
National Professional Standards for Teachers - NPST.  This will enhance 
the capabilities of teachers and will be followed by all 92 lakh teachers 
of public and private school system in the c ountry.   
 Toys are both an expression of entertainment and learning.  A unique 
indigenous toy -based learning – pedagogy for all levels of school 
education will be developed.  This will transform classroom 
transactions from mundane and rote learning to an e ngaging and 
joyful experience.  
 A National Digital Educational Architecture (NDEAR ) will be set up 
within the context of a Digital First Mindset where the Digital 
Architecture will not only support teaching and learning activities but 
also educational planning, governance and administrative activities of 
the Centre and the States/ Union  Territories.  It will provide a diverse 
education eco -system architecture for development of digital 
infrastructure, a federated but inter operable system that will ensure 
autonomy of all stakeholders, specially States and UTs.  
 For children with hearing impairments, the Government will work on 
standardization of Indian Sign language across the country, and 
develop National and State Curriculum materials for use by them.   
 There are a number of senior and retired teachers.  They will be used 
for individual  mentoring of school teachers and educators through 
constant online/offline support on subjects, themes and pedagogy.  
 Students have so far been evaluated on uni -dimensional parameters.  
There will be a complete shift from using assessments to not only 
judg e the cognitive levels of the learner but also using it as an 
opportunity to identify the unique strengths and the potential of the 
child. To this effect, a holistic progress card is envisaged to provide 
students with valuable information on their strength s, areas of 
interest, needed areas of focus and thereby helping them in making 
optimal career choices.    
 To enable increased access of resources, online modules covering the 
entire gamut of adult education will be introduced.   
 During the year, despite th e COVID -19 pandemic, we have trained 
more than 30 lakh elementary school teachers digitally, covering the 42 
 
whole gamut of education.   Taking this further, in 2021 -22, we will 
enable the training of 56 lakh school teachers through the National 
Initiative fo r School Heads and Teachers for Holistic Advancement 
(NISTHA).  
 For the past few years our Prime Minister has been engaging with 
students every year before their Board Exams to help them overcome 
anxiety and stress.  In this direction, we will introduce CBS E Board 
Exam reforms in a phased manner to be effective from the 2022 -23 
academic session.  Exams will move away from rote -learning and 
students shall be tested on their conceptual clarity, analytical skills and 
application of knowledge to real life situat ions.  
 To promote enhanced academic collaboration with foreign higher 
educational institutions, it is proposed to put in place a regulatory 
mechanism to permit dual degrees, joint degrees, twinning 
arrangements and other such mechanisms.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 43 
 
ANNEXURE VI  
Statement of Extra Budgetary Resources (EBRs) (Govt. fully serviced bonds, NSSF loan and other resou rces)  
                                                                                                                                                   (In  ` crores)  
Part-A – EBRs mobilised through issue of Govt. fully serviced bonds    
Demand  
No.  Name of the Ministry/Department 
and Name of the Scheme  2016 -17 2017 -18 2018 -19 2019 -20  2020 -21 2020 -21 2021 -22 
Actuals  Actuals  Actuals  Actuals  BE RE BE 
24 Department of Higher Education         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL  Revitalising Infrastructure and 
Systems in Education (RISE)  --- --- --- --- 3000.00  --- 
44 Department of Health & Family 
Welfare        
Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha 
Yojana  --- --- --- --- 3000.00  --- 
59 Ministry of Housing & Urban 
Affairs        
 Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana 
(PMAY) - Urban  --- --- 20000.00  --- 10000.00  --- 
61 Department of Water Resources, 
River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation        
  Polavaram Irrigation Project  --- --- 1400.00  1850.00  --- 2234.29  
 
4225.00   (ii) Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai Yojana  
(Accelerated Irrigation Benefits 
Programme & other Projects)   
2187.00   
3105.00   
5493.40   
1963.30   
5000.00  
62 Department of Drinking Water & 
Sanitation        
 Swachh Bharat Mission (Rural)  
 Jal Jeevan Mission/National Rural 
Drinking Water Programme  --- 
--- --- 
--- 8698.20  
--- 3600.00  
--- ---- 
12000.00  --- 
--- 
70 Ministry of New & Renewable 
Energy        
 Grid Interactive Renewable Power, 
Off-Grid/ Distributed & Decentralized 
Renewable Power  1640.00  
 --- 
 
 --- 
 
 --- 
 
 --- --- 
  Pradhan Mantri -Kisan Urja 
Sanrakshan Evam Utthan 
Mahabhiyan (PM -KUSUM)  --- --- --- --- 1000.00  --- 
77 Ministry of Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways        
Inland Waterways Authority of India 
(IWAI) Projects  340.00  660.00  --- ---- --- --- 
78 Ministry of Power        
  Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti 
Yojana/SAUBHAGYA  5000.00  4000.00  13827.00  3782.00  5500.00  5000.00  
(ii)  Power System Development Fund 
Projects  ---  5504.70  --- --- --- 
86 Department of Rural Development        
Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana 
(PMAY) - Rural  --- 7330.00  10678.80  10811.00  10000.00  20000.00  
  Total  9167.00  15095.00  65602.10  22006.30  49500.00  31459.29  
  44 
 
 
Part -B – Financial support extended through loans from NSSF  
(In  ` crores)  
  # NSSF loan amount outstanding with FCI  as on 31.03.2020 was ` 2,54,600 crore.  
 
Notes :  
 
(i) Air India Asset Holding Limited (AIAHL) under M/o Civil Aviation was permitted to raise 
EBRs by issuing Govt. Fully Serviced Bonds of upto ` 7,000 crore in FY 2019 -20 to refinance AIs debt 
transferred to AIAHL.  
 
(ii) M/o Railways was permitted to meet fund requirement of upto `10,200 crore  
(` 5,200 crore in FY 2018 -19 & ` 5,000 crore in FY 2019 -20) through borrowings for financing its 
Nation al Projects. The repayment liability is being borne on General Revenues of Govt.  
 
(iii) Capital Infusion in Public Sector Banks:  An amount of `80,000 crore in  
2017 -18, `1,06,000 crore in 2018 -19 and ` 65,443 crore  in 2019 -20 was infused for recapitalisation of 
Public Sector Banks (PSBs). For this purpose, a provision of ` 20,000 crore was made in 2020 -21.  In 
the FY 2020 -21 so far, an amount of ` 5,500 crore has been infused by Government as fresh capital in 
PSBs t hrough non -interest bearing special securities. GoI has also infused capital through issue of 
bonds in 3 other banks namely IDBI ( ` 4,557 crore), EXIM Bank ( ` 5,050 crore) and IIFCL  
(` 5,297.60 crore).  
 
(iv) Statement of liability on annuity projects is given in Part -B of the Receipt Budget 2021 -22. 
Amount of unpaid annual liability at the end of financial year 2019 -20 was `41,822.04 crore.  
 
 
  Sl. 
No.  Name of the Ministry/Department/  
Name of the Entity  2016 -17 2017 -18 2018 -19 2019 -20 2020 -21 2020 -21  2021 -22 
Actuals  Actuals  Actuals  Actuals  BE RE BE 
1 Department of Food & Public 
Distribution         
Food Corporation of India#  70000.00  65000.00  97000.00  110000.00  136600.00  84636.00  --- 
2 Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs         
 Building Materials & Technology 
Promotion Council  --- 8000.00  --- 15000.00  --- 10000.00   
3 Department of Fertilizers         
 Metals & Minerals Trading Corporation  --- --- --- 1310.00  --- --- --- 
4 Support to other public  agencies  (to 
meet requirement for additional 
resources, if any, under some specific 
scheme/project)        30000.00  
  Total  70000.00  73000.00  97000.00  126310.00  136600.00  94636.00  30000.00  
 Grand Total (A+B)  79167.00  88095.00  162602.10  148316.13  186100.00  126095.29  30000.00  45 
 
Annex to Part B of Budget Speech  
Direct Tax Proposals:  
Sl. 
No. Proposals  Proposed Amendments in brief  
1. Relief to Senior Citizens  
 In order to ease compliance burden on senior 
citizen pensioners who are of 75 years of age 
or above, it is proposed to exempt them from 
the requirement of filing of income tax if the 
full amount of tax payable has been deducted 
by the payi ng bank. This exemption is 
proposed to be made available to such senior 
citizens who have only interest income apart 
from the pension income.   
2. Reduction in Time Limits  In order to reduce compliance burden, the 
time -limit for re -opening of assessment i s 
being reduced to 3 years from the current 6 
years from the end of the relevant 
assessment year.  Re -opening up to 10 years 
is proposed to be allowed only if there is 
evidence of undisclosed income of ` 50 lakh 
or more for a year. Further, it is proposed to 
completely remove discretion in re -opening 
and henceforth re -opening shall be made only 
in cases flagged by system on the basis of data 
analytics, objection of C&AG and in 
search/survey cases.  
Further, in order to bring certainty in income 
tax proceedi ngs at the earliest, it is also 
proposed to reduce the time limits for general 
assessment or processing of income tax 
return by three months and also for filing of 
returns.  46 
 
3. Relief for Dividend  In order to provide relief to taxpayers, 
advance -tax liability on dividend income shall 
arise only after the declaration/payment of 
dividend. The dividend paid to Real Estate 
Infrastructure Trusts or Infrastructure 
Investment Trusts (REIT/InvIT) shall be 
exempt from TDS. It is also proposed to clarify 
that d eduction of tax on incomes including 
dividend income of Foreign Portfolio Investors 
may be made at treaty rate. It is also 
proposed to exempt dividend payment from 
levy of Minimum Alternate Tax (MAT) for 
foreign company if the applicable tax rate is 
less t han the rate of MAT.  
4. Setting up of Dispute 
Resolution Committee 
(DRC)  
 For reducing litigation and to give an impetus 
to the dispute resolution for small taxpayers, 
a Dispute Resolution Committee is proposed 
to be constituted. A taxpayer having taxable  
income up to ` 50 lakh and disputed income 
up to ` 10 lakh shall be eligible to approach 
the Committee. For ensuring efficiency, 
transparency and accountability, the 
procedure of the Committee will be 
conducted in a faceless manner.  
Consequently, the Settlement Commission 
shall be discontinued from 01.02.2021. 
However, the pending cases shall be decided 
by an Interim Board if opted by the applicant.  
5. Faceless Income Tax 
Appellate Tribunal (ITAT)  
 In order to provide transparent tax appellate 
mechanism, it is proposed to the make the 
Income Tax Appellate Tribunal faceless and 
jurisdiction -less. A National Faceless Income -
tax Appellate Tribunal Centre shall be 
established and all the communication 
between the Tribunal and the appellant shall 
be made electronically. Wherever personal 
hearing is needed, it shall be done through 47 
 
video -conferencing.  
6. Tax Neutrality of 
conversion of Urban 
Cooperative Bank (UCB) 
into a Small Finance Bank 
(SFB)  In order t o facilitate the transition of UCBs to 
SFBs, it is proposed to provide tax neutrality 
for the transition of UCBs to SFBs.  Hence, the 
UCB shall not be required to pay capital gains 
for the assets transferred to the SFBs.  
7. Tax incentives for 
Affordable Ho using and 
Affordable Rental 
Housing Project  
 In order to incentivise purchase of affordable 
house, It is proposed to extend the eligibility 
period for claim of additional deduction for 
interest of ` 1.5 lakh paid for loan taken for 
purchase of an affordab le house to 31st March 
2022.  
In order to increase the supply of affordable 
house, it is proposed to extend eligibility 
period for claiming tax holiday for affordable 
housing project by one more year to 31st 
March, 2022.  
In order to promote supply of Affor dable 
Rental Housing for the migrant workers, it is 
also proposed to allow a new tax exemption 
for the notified Affordable Rental Housing 
Projects.  
8. Tax benefit for Start -ups  
 In order to incentivise setting -up of more 
start -ups in the country, it is proposed to 
extend the eligibility period to claim tax 
holiday for the start -ups by one more year to 
31st March, 2022.  
In order to incentivise investment in start -up, 
it is proposed to extend the eligibility period 
of claiming capital gains exemption for 
investment made in the start -ups by one 
more year to 31st Match, 2022.  
9. Relaxation to NRI for 
Income of Retirement In order to remove the genuine hardship 
faced by the NRIs in respect of their income 
accrued on foreign retirement benefi t account 48 
 
Benefit Account  
 due to mismatch in taxation, it is proposed to 
notify rules for aligning the taxation of income 
arising on foreign retirement benefit account.  
10. Exemption from Audit  
 To incentivise digital transactions and to 
reduce the compliance burden of t he person 
who is carrying almost all of their transactions 
digitally, it is  proposed to increase the limit 
for tax audit for persons who are undertaking 
95% of their transactions digitally from  
` 5 crore to ` 10 crore.  
11. Relaxation of Condition 
for carry forward of loss 
for Disinvestment  In order to promote strategic disinvestment of 
PSU, it is proposed to relax the condition 
regarding carry forward of loss for disinvested 
PSU in amalgamation.  
12. Relaxation of Condition 
for tax neutral Demerger 
for disinvestment  In order to promote strategic disinvestment, it 
is proposed to deem the transfer of assets by 
the PSU to the resulting company as tax 
neutral demerger.  
13. Zero Coupon Bonds by 
Infrastructure Debt Fund 
(IDF)  In order to allow funding of infrastructure, it is 
proposed to make Zero Coupon Bonds issued 
by notified IDF eligible for tax benefit.  
14. Rationalisation of 
taxation of Unit Linked 
Insurance Plan (ULIP)  In order to rationalise taxation of ULIP, it is 
proposed to allow tax exemption for maturity 
proceed of the ULIP having annual premium 
up to ` 2.5 lakh. However, the amount 
received on death shall continue to remain 
exempt without any limit on the annual 
premium. The cap of ` 2.5 lakh on the annual 
premium  of ULIP shall be applicable only for 
the policies taken on or after 01.02.2021. 
Further, in order to provide parity, the non -
exempt ULIP shall be provided same 
concessional capital gains taxation regime as 
available to the mutual fund.  
 49 
 
15. Rationalisati on of Tax -
free Income on Provident 
Funds  
 In order to rationalise tax exemption for the 
income earned by high income employees, it 
is proposed to restrict tax exemption for the 
interest income earned on the employees’ 
contribution to various provident funds to the 
annual contribution of ` 2.5 lakh . This 
restriction shall be applicable only for the 
contribution made on or after 01.04.2021.  
16. Taxability of Surplus 
amount received by 
partners  
 In order to provide certainty, it is proposed to 
rationalise the provisions relating to taxation 
of the a ssets or amount received by partners 
from the partnership firm in excess of their 
capital contribution.  
17. Clarification on 
Depreciation on Goodwill  
 In order to provide certainty, it is proposed to 
clarify that no depreciation on Goodwill shall 
be allow ed. However, the deduction for the 
amount paid for acquiring Goodwill shall be 
allowed on sale of Goodwill.  
18. Clarification for the Slump 
Sale  In order to provide certainty, it is proposed to 
clarify that slump sale shall include all types of 
transfer.  
19. Fake Invoice/sham 
transaction  
 In order to protect the revenue, it is proposed 
to provide that the penalty proceedings 
initiated for fake invoice/sham transactions of 
more than ` 2 crore shall also be eligible for 
provisional attachment of assets.  
20. Exemption for Small 
Trusts  
 In order to reduce compliance burden on the 
small charitable trusts running educational 
institutions and hospitals, it is proposed to 
increase the limit on annual receipts for these 
trusts from present ` 1 crore to ` 5 crore  for 
non-applicability of various compliances like 
approval etc.  
21 Carry Forward of loss by 
Charitable Organisations  In order to provide certainty, it is proposed to 
clarify that charitable trusts shall not be 50 
 
 permitted to claim carry forward of loss. 
However, the loan repayment and 
replenishment of corpus shall be allowed as 
application.  
22. Clarification for 
Equalisation Levy  
 In order to provide certainty, it is being 
expressly clarified that transaction taxable 
under income -tax are not liable for 
equalisation levy. Further, it is also proposed 
to clarify regarding applicability of 
equalisation levy on physical/offline supply of 
goods and services.    
23 Timely deposit of 
Employees’ contribution 
to labour welfare funds 
by Due Date  
 Delay in deposit of the contribution of 
employees towards various welfare funds by 
employers result in permanent loss of 
interest/income for the employees. In order 
to ensure timely deposit of employees’ 
contribution to these funds by the employers, 
it is proposed to reite rate that that the late 
deposit of employees’ contribution by the 
employer shall never be allowed as deduction 
to the employer.  
24 Relaxation in conditions 
for exemption to 
Sovereign Wealth Fund & 
Pension Fund (SWF/PF)  
 In order to incentivise more number of 
SWF/PF to invest in Indian Infrastructure, it is 
proposed to relax some of conditions for 
availing 100% tax exemption introduced in the 
last budget. The conditions which are 
proposed to be relaxed include prohibition on 
loans or borrowings, restriction on 
commercial activities, direct investment in 
entity owning infrastructure, etc.     
25. Tax incentives for IFSC  
 In order to promote IFSC, It is proposed to 
provide more tax incentives which includes 
tax holiday for c apital gains incomes of 
aircraft leasing company, tax exemptions for 
aircraft lease rental paid to foreign lessor, tax 
incentive for re -location of foreign funds in 
IFSC and tax exemptions to investment 51 
 
division of the foreign banks located in IFSC.  
26 Non-filing of Return by 
Deductee/Collectee  
 In order to discourage the practice of not 
filing returns by the persons in whose case 
substantial amount of tax has been 
deducted/collected, it is proposed to provide 
that a person in whose case TDS/TCS of 
`50,00 0 or more has been made for the past 
two years and who has not filed return of 
income, the rate of TDS/TCS shall be at the 
double of the specified rate or 5%, whichever 
is higher. This provision shall not be applicable 
for the transactions where full amoun t of tax 
is required to be deducted e.g. salary income, 
payment to non -resident, lottery, etc.  
27 Levy of TDS on Purchase 
of Goods  
 In order to widen the scope of TDS, it is 
proposed to levy a TDS of 0.1% on a purchase 
transaction exceeding ` 50 lakh in a  year. In 
order to reduce the compliance burden, it is 
also propose d to provide that the 
responsibility of deduction shall lie only on 
the persons whose turnover exceeds ` 10 
crore.  
28 Substitution of Authority 
for Advance Rulings with 
Board for Advance 
Rulings  To ensure faster disposal of cases, it is 
proposed to replace the Authority for 
Advance Rulings with a Board for Advance 
Rulings. It is also proposed to provide appeal 
against the order of such Board to the High 
Court.  
29. Alignment of Minimum 
Alternate Tax (MAT) for 
Advanced Pricing 
Agreement (APA) and 
secondary adjustment  In order to provide relief to the taxpayers in 
whose case MAT liability has arisen in the year 
of repatriation on account APA or secondary 
adjustment, it is proposed to provide relief by 
aligning the MAT provisions with the year of 
taxability of such income.  
30. Exemption for Leave 
Travel Concession (LTC) In order to provide relief to employees, it is 
proposed to provide tax exemption to the 
amount given to an employee in lieu of LTC 52 
 
cash scheme  subject to incurring of specified expenditure.  
31 Increase in safe harbor 
limit for primary sale of 
residential units.  In order to incentivise home buyers and real 
estate developers, it is proposed to increase 
safe harbour limit from 10% to 20% for the 
specified primary sale of residential units.  
32 Miscellaneous   It is proposed to make consequential 
amendment in the prov isions relating to 
processing of returns for allowing certain 
deductions and to provide clarification for 
adjustment of income reported in Audit 
Report.  
 It is also proposed to enable issuance of 
notice for calling for returns by the 
prescribed authority.  
 It is proposed to empower the Board to 
relax the rule relating to defective return 
for a class of taxpayers and to align due 
dates of return for certain taxpayers,  
 It is proposed to clarify that Limited Liability 
Partnership shall not be eligible for 
presum ptive tax for professionals.  
 It is proposed to define the term “liable to 
tax” to provide certainty.  
 
 
  